[Page 4]
© International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, Geneva, 2023
Any part of this publication may be cited, copied, translated into other languages or adapted to meet local needs without prior permission from the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent 
Societies, provided that the source is clearly stated.
Cover photo: Bangladesh 2022, © IFRC Bangladesh Communications
Contact us: 
Requests for commercial reproduction should be directed to the IFRC Secretariat: 
Address: Chemin des Crêts 17, Petit-Saconnex, 1209 Geneva, Switzerland  
Postal address: P.O. Box 303, 1211 Geneva 19, Switzerland 
T +41 (0)22 730 42 22 | F +41 (0)22 730 42 00 | E secretariat@ifrc.org | W ifrc.org

[Page 5]
Message from the Secretary General
2024 Overview
Introduction
Situational analysis 
About the IFRC 
Mobilizing investment by result
Regular resources 
Strategic priorities
Climate and environment
Disasters and crises
Health and wellbeing
Migration and displacement
Values, power and inclusion
Enabling functions
Strategic and operational coordination
National Society development
Humanitarian diplomacy
Accountability and agility
Red Cross Red Crescent Reference Centres
IFRC network country information

[Page 6]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
The IFRC’s commitment to its 191-member National 
Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies – and to the at-risk communities supported by their volunteers and staff – is enshrined in the Agenda for Renewal and in our collective Strategy 2030.
In 2024, these commitments will be underlined by a raft of new measures that strengthen the position of National Societies at the heart of all IFRC work, and which reaffirm the centrality of our volunteers as a crucial element of safe and inclusive societies.
Their local action – accompanied and coordinated by the global reach of the IFRC – is needed more than ever in a world facing severe humanitarian challenges. 
Disasters and crises have driven a rise in human suffering in Africa, Asia Pacific, Americas, Europe and the Middle East. Many existing vulnerabilities have become entrenched, particularly in complex and fragile settings. People on the move continued to face discrimination and danger along migratory routes. A sense of fragmentation and polarization has shaken communities and countries alike.
MESSAGE FROM THE 
SECRETARY GENERAL
Jagan Chapagain
Secretary General, CEO
International Federation of 
Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies

[Page 7]
Message from the Secretary General
This plan shows in detail how the IFRC will support National Societies in meeting these challenges around the world.
The IFRC has been working towards strengthening the capacity of National Societies, providing operational and strategic coordination, and representing them on the global stage for more than a century – making us the original localization organization. Working towards ensuring accountability and integrity across the network continues to remain a high priority.
Thanks to a new unified planning process that aligns and delivers vital IFRC support to the areas and priorities identified by individual National Societies, donors and partners will see transformative impact at country level in 2024.
This plan shows how the whole IFRC network will collaborate and coordinate a high-impact, principled and fully accountable response to the climate crisis, evolving disasters and crises, health and wellbeing, migration and displacement, and in building peaceful, safe and inclusive societies.
It gives insight into the ongoing work in innovative funding mechanisms such as the Digital 
Transformation Impact Platform, the Global Climate 
Resilience Platform, and our water, sanitation and hygiene initiative One WASH.
It also highlights lifesaving and life-changing international partnerships such as the ECHO Programmatic 
Partnership and REACH, Resilient and Empowered 
African Community Health, where the IFRC and the 
African Centre for Disease Control seek to transform community health worker coverage on the continent.
This plan captures the IFRC network’s ambitions for 
2024. Together, we will achieve these ambitions at community level with the treasured support of the many partners who believe in local humanitarian action, and in the power of humanity.
Afghanistan 2023 © Meer Abdullah Rasikh /

[Page 8]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
2024 OVERVIEW
IFRC  2.0B
Host National Societies  1.1B
Participating National Societies  0.4B
TOTAL  3.5 BILLION
IFRC NETWORK 
TOTAL FUNDING 
REQUIREMENT 
FOR 2024 in CHF
IFRC AND 
NETWORK FUNDING 
REQUIREMENTS BY 
THEMATIC AREA 
FOR 2024
In CHF millions
IFRC funding requirement
Network funding requirment – including IFRC
Disasters & crises
Migration & displacement
Climate & environment
Emergencies
Health & wellbeing
Values, power & inclusion
Enabling functions
Special purpose funds
1,200.0
130.5
64.4
145.7
126.7
85.4
35.8
198.6
112.0
952.8
438.8
147.4
140.5

[Page 9]
2024 Overview
ONGOING 
EMERGENCIES 
IN 2024 to assist nearly 40 million people
PEOPLE TO BE 
REACHED BY 
THE NETWORK 
IN 2024
Disasters and crises
Migration and displacement
Emergency Appeals
DREF
Climate and environment
Health and wellbeing
Values, power and inclusion
73%
Africa
3%
Americas
14%
Asia Pacific
3%
Europe
7%
MENA
18%
24%
40%
8%
10%

[Page 10]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
INTRODUCTION
In recent years, the IFRC’s donors and partners have accompanied the organization to achieve greater impact, agility, embed a culture of risk management, and ensure the safeguarding of people and resources alike. The IFRC, with their support, has adapted its processes and its local-to-global disaster and crisis response systems to do better and reach further. 
This Global Plan shows the next steps to be taken to make the IFRC future-fit so that it can better support the principled local action of National Societies in 191 countries. It illustrates the links between global ambitions built upon local needs, delivered by National Societies and with coordination and support from the IFRC – ensuring both local and global impact. 
The IFRC strives to create an enabling environment for National Societies’ work and development as they support communities. This work is centred on the needs of those communities, working with them to reduce their risk and to lead on creating solutions. 
The work for 2024 is structured by five strategic priorities and four enabling functions. The network is focused on reducing impact of emergencies through our work on climate, health and migration; responding to impact when needed through our work in disasters and crises; and doing the right thing in the right way, through our work in values, power and inclusion. 
All IFRC work is tied to the ambitions and priorities of National Societies through unified planning. This process begins at community level to create individual country plans, which then inform IFRC’s planning at regional and headquarters levels. 
Each plan covers Red Cross and Red Crescent work in emergency response, and in the longer-term programming that builds resilience at community level. Country plans highlight how National Societies, with their 16.5 million volunteers, will deliver services to communities in need wherever they are – even in fragile settings, complex emergencies or in the most remote areas. These plans will be available on the 
IFRC’s public website. 
This country-level planning work culminates in the 
IFRC’s Global Plan for 2024.
For 2024, the IFRC is presenting a unified global plan, showing the scope of the IFRC network and how it works from local to global levels. This will better demonstrate how the IFRC will support National 
Societies to develop and deliver their country-level programming, and how this work is then amplified at international level.
The Global Plan includes a detailed section on IFRC delegations which focuses on how the IFRC will support National Societies to deliver at country-level.
In this document, partners can learn how the IFRC network will power high-impact local to global programmes in areas like climate, health and migration in 2024, including through the IFRC’s innovative funding platforms. 
It covers initiatives that will be launched, implemented or mainstreamed in 2024. These are all designed to further improve how the IFRC works across the global organization, with its National 
Societies as a distributed network, and with its partners and donors as a transparent and fully accountable entity.
This includes 30 Global, Regional and National 
Society-led Red Cross and Red Crescent 
Reference Centres that provide expert guidance and resources in specific areas of humanitarian work. 
In 2024, the power and knowledge of these expert bodies will be better harnessed for the good of the network during emergencies and in global programmes, and through a well-coordinated role as champions of knowledge management and advocacy. 
Work to modernize the network also includes IFRC plans to “level up” the 80 least digitally mature 
National Societies by ensuring they have the hardware, knowledge and resources they need to be visible and active online. 
This is crucial in a world where potential service users, volunteers and partners expect to find and engage with a National Society through their phones.

[Page 11]
Introduction
These efforts – and many more outlined in the 
Global Plan – are a continuation of the IFRC’s commitment to create an enabling environment for all our member National Societies to develop and to thrive, and to expand their presence as strong local actors and the partner of choice for government and businesses in their countries.
The humanitarian challenges and needs will only continue to grow. This Global Plan shows how, together, the IFRC network will work to reduce disaster and crisis risks in 2024. It details how the IFRC will ensure that its local-to-global humanitarian response system is as well coordinated and efficient as possible. 
Above all, it keeps a focus on the communities and volunteers at the heart of all the work in the IFRC network. Empowered and resilient communities are best placed to reduce their own risks and play a leading role in creating a safe and dignified future.
Even the largest humanitarian network in the world cannot achieve these goals in isolation. 
Your support is vital for the IFRC is to help its member National Societies to reach the rising numbers of communities at risk – reducing vulnerabilities, responding effectively where needs emerge, and investing long-term to build resilience to reduce future needs.
The IFRC invites all partners to support IFRC network work in communities large and small, in remote areas and in fragile contexts, so that together we can achieve a transformative humanitarian impact wherever and whenever it is needed most.
Please note that the funding requirements in this plan are all listed in Swiss francs (CHF). 
Syria 2023 © Syrian Arab Red 
Crescent

[Page 12]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
SITUATIONAL ANALYSIS 
In 2023, the world is still grappling with ongoing crises like the food security crisis in Africa, migration crises around the world and crises in Sudan, 
Ethiopia, Syria and Yemen, the new protracted crisis in Ukraine and the aftermath of COVID-19. At the same time, a plethora of new crises are severely impacting people in, for example, Israel and the 
Occupied Palestinian Territories, Türkiye, Sudan, 
Morocco, Libya and Greece.
Humanitarian emergencies have become more frequent and complex over recent decades, evolving into protracted crises, like the Cox’s Bazar refugee crisis in Bangladesh, Afghanistan and Haiti, characterized by the intricate interplay of conflict, climate change and disasters. 
Their repercussions exacerbate the suffering of individuals in already vulnerable situations, magnifying existing issues such as poverty, hunger, inadequate healthcare and disasters.
A common denominator in responding to these crises is the presence of National Societies operating in 
191 countries. The dedicated staff and volunteers of the IFRC network work tirelessly to address humanitarian needs, often at great personal risk, as they strive to save lives in the face of disaster and conflict. 
The IFRC’s work spans diverse regions, including the most fragile and vulnerable areas around the globe.
CLIMATE CHANGE AND ENVIRONMENT 
Climate change is undeniably one of the most significant threats to humanity’s future and is a major driver of humanitarian crises today. IFRC data indicates that in the past ten years, 86 percent of all disasters triggered by natural hazards were caused by weather and climate-related events. These disasters killed at least 410,000 people and affected a further 1.7 billion (IFRC Annual Report 2022). 
In Africa, climate change significantly affects food and water systems, which rely heavily on rainfed agriculture and pastoralism. These challenges compound the existing issues of poverty, rapid population growth and limited resources, leading to displacement, deaths and food insecurity. 
The Americas face extreme vulnerability to climate change, with high exposure to warming temperatures, sea level rise, coastal erosion and ocean acidification. The region has been impacted by a range of extreme events, including hurricanes, mudslides and floods, particularly in the greater 
Caribbean and North America.
Climate change in the Asia Pacific region is increasing the risk of diseases like dengue due to prolonged mosquito-breeding seasons and cyclones. The 
Pacific Islands, for example, are some of the most vulnerable areas. By 2050, an estimated 500-700 million people in Asia will face a 20per cent increase in the probability of lethal heatwaves. 
Europe and Central Asia have witnessed rising temperatures and severe heatwaves in recent years, along with heavy flooding in some regions. 
Projections indicate that heatwaves and forest fires will become more frequent and severe, particularly in southern Europe. 
Middle East and North Africa (MENA) faces a range of climate and environmental challenges. The region’s harsh climate conditions, extremely high temperatures, limited water resources and rainfall affect its vulnerability to climate change impacts. 
Water stress is expected to expose 80-100 million people to its effects by 2025.
DISASTERS AND CRISES 
The world is expected to experience around 560 disasters annually by 2030, with climate change and disasters pushing an additional 37.6 million people into extreme poverty. A worst-case scenario could result in an additional 100.7 million people living in poverty by 2030. Inequality, poverty and discrimination contribute to growing disaster risk, and disasters disproportionately affect the most vulnerable, deepening inequalities. 
Africa is experiencing an increasing number of emergency operations. Towards the end of 2023, there were 13 active emergency appeals (including hunger, population movement, disease outbreaks and weather-related emergencies), and 28 active 
IFRC DREF responses. These operations sought to

[Page 13]
Situational analysis assist approximately 19.4 million people for a total funding requirement of 256.7 million Swiss francs. 
The Americas face a variety of challenges, including hurricanes, earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, floods and the movement of migrants. Towards the end of 
2023, there were three active emergency appeals and 17 active IFRC DREF responses that sought to assist more than 424,000 people for a total funding requirement of 52.5 million Swiss francs. 
Asia Pacific remains prone to highest category land-falling storms (Bangladesh, Philippines 2023); while protracted crises in Afghanistan remained very high. Toward the end of 2023, there were nine active emergency appeals and 17 active IFRC DREF responses that sought to assist 6.5 million people for a total funding requirement of 362.9 million 
Swiss francs. 
Europe continued, in 2023, to suffer from the protracted crisis in Ukraine, population movement, earthquakes and weather-related crises. Towards the end of 2023 there were three active emergency appeals and 12 active IFRC DREF responses that sought to assist 24.2 million people for a total funding requirement of 1.2 billion Swiss francs.
In MENA, millions of people remain affected by protracted crises, weather-related emergencies and earthquakes. Towards the end of 2023, there were six active emergency appeals and nine active IFRC 
DREF responses that sought to assist 6.9 million people for a total funding requirement of 256.8 million Swiss francs. 
HEALTH AND WELLBEING
Before the COVID-19 pandemic, global health indicators had already shown signs of slowing progress. 
Unfortunately, the pandemic exacerbated these issues, straining healthcare systems and exacerbating disparities. 
Non-communicable diseases (NCDs) account for 
70per cent of global deaths and disabilities in low- and middle-income countries (WHO, 2023). Health resilience in the coming decade will be tested by factors like population movements, epidemics, conflicts, NCDs, disasters, technological risks and climate change.
Climate change and environmental shifts in Africa trigger a concerning surge in epidemics. Frequent floods and cyclones result in cholera and vector- borne diseases. Prolonged droughts in 23 African nations worsen malnutrition and undernourishment, increasing susceptibility to diarrhea and vaccine-preventable illnesses, especially measles. 
Healthcare access in countries in the Americas varies significantly. Security issues, including gang violence and drug trafficking, remain a concern. 
Non-communicable diseases (NCDs) are a leading cause of premature and preventable deaths, constituting 78per cent of all deaths in individuals aged 
30 to 70. 
Asia Pacific has seen a decline in childhood vaccinations, with significant increases in measles cases. 
Routine immunization rates have dropped due to factors like conflict, misinformation, and disruptions caused by COVID-19. Mental health and psychosocial support services are in demand, and health access varies across countries. 
Europe has had to deal with the profound impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on public health. 
Non-communicable diseases like heart disease, cancer, diabetes and mental health issues are of particular concern, and the movement of people across borders presents public health challenges. 
In the MENA region, economic and social challenges intersect with public health challenges, such as the transition from communicable diseases to non-communicable diseases. Ongoing conflicts and refugee crises strain health systems, and mental health and psychosocial impacts intensify due to loss of homes and livelihoods. 
MIGRATION AND DISPLACEMENT
Displaced people require immediate protection and assistance, including shelter, healthcare, safe water, sanitation, food and nutrition. Beyond these immediate needs, support for durable solutions such as return, local integration or resettlement is crucial. The number of refugees and IDPs worldwide increased significantly. Conflict, violence and disasters force people to flee both across borders and within countries. 
In Africa, violence and displacement are spreading rapidly, with an increasing number of displaced people, particularly in Sudan. Djibouti is experiencing an influx of migrants from Ethiopia and Somalia,

[Page 14]
IFRC Global Plan 2024 exacerbated by one of the worst series of successive droughts in history. 
Asia Pacific faces significant disaster-induced displacement and complex contexts. Ongoing crisis, such as the Rohingya crisis in Bangladesh, Pakistan, and Afghanistan pose unique challenges. Many have lost everything and have no immediate prospects of returning home, creating longer-term needs. 
The Americas continue to experience challenges with border closures worsening the situation and increasing protection risks. The migration of people from south to north, often through treacherous routes like the Darién Gap jungle, exposes them to risks such as trafficking and abuse. This migration is also transcontinental, with migrants crossing from approximately 42 countries. 
Europe and Central Asia have experienced evolving migration patterns, with the conflict in Ukraine significantly affecting internal displacement. 
Migrants crossing the Mediterranean Sea continue to suffer enormous human losses and vulnerability. More than 2,300 people lost their lives in the 
Mediterranean crossing in 2023.
MENA has a complex mix of migration dynamics, with various countries playing roles as sources, transit points and destinations for migrants and refugees. This includes, for example, migrants coming from Africa to Yemen or those fleeing from Syria. The region faces significant funding shortfalls to address the needs of vulnerable refugees and migrants. 
VALUES POWER AND INCLUSION 
The COVID-19 pandemic underscored the importance of information sharing and building trust, highlighting the critical need for effective communication in crisis response. Protection risks, including sexual and gender-based violence and human trafficking, intensified during the pandemic. 
Looking at current humanitarian crises in Africa, it is critical to remember that disasters often exacerbate prevailing inequalities, dispossession and marginalization. Drought in the region has eroded resources and families are taking desperate measures to survive. Increased movement and displacement, breakdowns in family and community support systems and escalations in negative coping strategies have led to increased child protection and sexual and gender-based violence risks.
Values-based tensions have emerged globally, creating fault lines within and between countries, regions and communities. Latin America and the 
Caribbean have experienced high homicide rates due to factors like increased cocaine production and criminal activity. Gender-related murders, or femicides, remain a significant concern, with thousands recorded across the region. 
Sexual and gender-based violence remains a pressing issue in Asia Pacific, impacting health, humanitarian efforts, the economy and public policy. 
Domestic violence, gender-related murders have surged across Europe, the conflict in Ukraine disproportionately affects women and children, making them vulnerable to abuse, trafficking and violence. 
MENA faces challenges such as high youth unemployment rates, gender disparities in employment, and the impact of conflicts and displacement on mental health. Public health officials are grappling with the rise of non-communicable diseases, mental health disorders, and the complexities of refugee and migrant healthcare access.
HUMANITARIAN FUNDING OVERVIEW
The demand for humanitarian assistance has again reached unprecedented levels, with an increasing number of people in need due to crises like the 
Ukraine war, and worsening situations in Afghanistan and the Horn of Africa. 
While Global Humanitarian Assistance grew in 2022 by about 27per cent from USD 36.9 billion to 46.9 billion, with private sector growing of about 29per cent from USD 6.8 billion to 8.8 billion, needs have continued to grow faster. 
The sheer scale of need has resulted in a record-high humanitarian funding shortfall. The strain on the humanitarian system is due to various shocks, including climate change and the war in Ukraine, as well as new and escalating crises like earthquakes and conflicts in Türkiye, Syria, Sudan, and Israel and the Occupied Palestinian Territories. 
Funding to local and national actors as a share of total humanitarian assistance remained very small

[Page 15]
Situational analysis in 2022. Despite sustained advocacy, increasing commitments from top donors and momentum through the Grand Bargain, efforts to increase the volumes of funding available for local and national actors continue to fall short. The IFRC continues to be a leader in localization to ensure funds go to local actors like National Societies. 
Cash and voucher transfers increased by a record volume in 2022. The steady growth seen since 2017 in the provision of humanitarian assistance as cash and vouchers continued in 2022. Cash and vouchers accounted for an estimated 20 per cent of total humanitarian assistance in 2022.
Funding for the Red Cross Red Cresent Movement grew 17 per cent in 2022 (as part of the Peer 
Review). National Society growth was mostly driven by Individual Giving and Corporations, while IFRC growth was largely driven by public funds. 
In 2022, 18 donors gave above 10 million Swiss francs through the IFRC. The percentage of funds from the IFRC’s Donor Advisory Group countries represented 86 per cent of all voluntary contributions in 2022 and almost 96 per cent of all voluntary contributions to regular resources in 2022.
Given growing needs, diversification of funding is key, including for the IFRC network. One such area is innovative finance. As of mid-2023, at least 20 
National Societies are engaged in innovative finance projects. At the IFRC, an insurance mechanism has been integrated into the IFRC DREF, and an Islamic 
Finance Platform is expected to be launched in early 2024.
Addressing humanitarian challenges requires significant changes in humanitarian funding and response, including a focus on addressing the root causes of crises and supporting long-term recovery efforts. The need for these changes is more pressing than ever.
Eswatini 2023 © Eija Palosuo / Finnish 
Red Cross

[Page 16]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
ABOUT THE IFRC 
The IFRC is one global organization working to coordinate support to, and for the development of, 191 member National Societies worldwide. Each is an independent local actor providing humanitarian support at community level, where it is needed the most.
The organization’s structure is designed to promote National Society ownership of their IFRC, and to encourage National Society participation in well-coordinated 
Federation-wide humanitarian and development work.
IFRC’S GOVERNANCE
IFRC’s governing bodies inform, direct, manage and monitor the strategy and performance of the organization, and ensure accountability and legal compliance.
The General Assembly is the highest governing body of the IFRC. It meets every two years and comprises representatives from member National Societies. 
The Governing Board governs the IFRC between sessions of the General Assemblies, meeting at least twice a year. 
The board comprises the IFRC’s President and Vice 
Presidents, and representatives from elected member National Societies, from every background and walk of life. The IFRC’s statutes require an equitable gender balance as well as fair geographical distribution in Governance.
The IFRC President is a National Society leader elected by their peers during a General Assembly. 
The President is the highest personality of the IFRC and is responsible for guiding the organization, ensuring that it implements Governance decisions, and exercises its functions as defined in the 
Constitution. 
The IFRC Governing Board has five Vice Presidents. 
Four are elected by their peers and come from each of IFRC’s four statutory regions. They are joined by an ex-officio Vice President from the host country, 
Switzerland. The Governing Board is supported in its work by several commissions and committees:
The Finance Commission, which is responsible for providing financial advice and oversight to the IFRC, is comprised of a chair and representatives from five National Societies. One member of the Finance 
Commission is required to be independent of the 
IFRC network. 
The Audit and Risk Commission advises the 
Governing Board on managing the IFRC’s financial and non-financial risks. It monitors and assesses the delivery of the IFRC’s internal audit processes. 
The Youth Commission advises National Societies and governing bodies on all matters relating to young people. It promotes the implementation of the IFRC’s Youth Policy and ensures young voices from across the network are heard and considered. 
The Compliance and Mediation Committee helps the IFRC resolve any breaches of integrity or disagreements involving member National Societies or any organs within the IFRC. 
The Election Committee oversees all elections and appointments to the IFRC’s governance bodies. 
It develops and monitors compliance with Electoral 
Standards to ensure fair and transparent electoral and appointment processes, and conducts investigations into any alleged breaches. 
The Chair of the Finance Commission, the Chair of the Audit and Risk Commission, and the Chair of the 
Youth Commission, all sit on the Governing Board.
THE GLOBAL IFRC: ITS STRUCTURE 
AND FUNCTIONS
The Secretary General is the IFRC’s Chief Executive 
Officer. He is responsible for leading the organization, ensuring the planning, organizing, coordinating, and controlling of resources, processes and people to accomplish IFRC’s goals and objectives. 
The Secretary General is supported by a four-level matrix management structure.
The Senior Leadership Team is a high-level leadership decision-making body. It is composed of IFRC’s three Under Secretaries General, and the Chief of 
Staff and Director of the Office of the Secretary

[Page 17]
About the IFRC
General. Its role is to support the Secretary General in providing overall leadership. 
The Global Leadership Team is a global leadership decision-making team. It is formed of the 
Senior Leadership Team, the five Regional Directors, and the Director of the Office of Internal Audit and Investigations. This team formulates secretariat policies, ensures effective management and accountability, oversees the IFRC’s activities worldwide, and works closely with National Societies to ensure the timely implementation of Governance decisions.
The Senior Management Team is a management coordination body based in IFRC’s Headquarters. 
It is comprised of the Senior Leadership Team, the Directors of Headquarters departments, the 
Director of the Global Service Centre, the Special 
Advisor to the President, the Head of Global Security, and the Head of Operational Membership and 
Movement Coordination. 
The Global Management Team is a global organization-wide management coordination body. It is comprised of the Global Leadership 
Team, the Deputy Regional Directors, the Senior 
Management Team, all Heads of Delegations and the Ombudsperson. 
IFRC’s leadership prioritizes the development and execution of strategies, establishing IFRC’s influential voice in humanitarian agendas and supporting resilient National Societies. 
It also fulfils coordination and operational responsibilities within the network and the broader humanitarian community.
At all times, the Governance and management of the IFRC work together to strengthen integrity, transparency and accountability, and to ensure effective membership coordination as well as mutually respectful cooperation with other components of the International Red Cross and Red Crescent 
Movement and external partners.
The Office of the Secretary General 
The Office of the Secretary General (OSG) coordinates support to the Secretary General and his leadership and management teams, ensures coherence across the IFRC, and supports the overall strategic direction of the organization. 
The OSG includes the Executive Office; Strategic planning; Security management; the Office of 
Internal Audit and Investigations; the Governance 
Excellence and Board Support department; the 
Legal department; the Special Representative of the Secretary General; the Ombudsperson, and the 
Safeguarding function.
National Society Development and 
Operations Coordination division
The division is comprised of the National Society 
Development Services department, the Disasters, 
Climate and Crises department, and the Health and Care department. The Under Secretary (USG) 
General of this division also has responsibility for Operational Movement and Membership 
Coordination (strategic coordination, and coordination within and between the IFRC membership and the wider International Red Cross and Red Crescent 
Movement), Information management and the 
Disaster Response Emergency Fund (DREF). In addition, the Regional Directors of IFRC’s five Regional 
Offices report to the USG in charge.
The work carried out by the National Society 
Development 
Services department includes 
Organizational Transformation; Disaster laws and policy; Protection, gender and inclusion; Volunteer 
Youth and Education development, and Coordination and knowledge development.
The Disaster, Climate and Crises department is responsible for Climate and environment, Opera- tions coordination, Migration and displacement, and Socio-economic empowerment (which includes work in food security and livelihoods, community engagement and accountability, cash and voucher assistance, and social protection).
Work carried out by the Health and Care department includes Emergency health, Community health and Water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH). It puts special attention on strengthening health systems, water systems and health security.
The Global Relations, Humanitarian 
Diplomacy and Digitalization division
This division is comprised of the Strategic Partner- ships and Resource Mobilization, Communications, and Digital Transformation departments, and the IFRC 
Representation Offices located in New York, Brussels, 
Addis Ababa and Dubai.

[Page 18]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
The Strategic Partnerships and Resource Mobi- lization department is responsible for exploring and building relationships with Government and 
National Societies, Multilateral and international financial institutions, the private sector and Strategy and support.
In Communications, teams specialize in Media and advocacy; Marketing; Web, and Strategy and global network.
The Digitalization and Information Technology department provides digital tools, advice and support, and encourages greater use of the network’s collective data. 
Partnership development and humanitarian diplo- macy activities are supported by the Red Cross 
European 
Union 
Office (Brussels); the 
IFRC 
Permanent Representation Office to the United 
Nations (the New York Delegation); the African Union and International Organizations (Addis Ababa), and the Gulf Cluster Office (Dubai).
Management Policy, Strategy and 
Corporate Services division
The IFRC’s Management Policy, Strategy and 
Corporate Services is comprised of the Financial and 
Administrative 
Management department, 
Human Resources Management department, the 
Global Humanitarian Services and Supply Chain 
Management department, and the IFRC’s Global 
Service Centre, which is based in Budapest, Hungary. 
Functions within the Financial and Administrative 
Management department include Finance shared services; Finance business partnering; Treasury and payment services; Finance processes and systems; 
Meeting and conference services; Building and office services; Library and archives services, and insurance.
The Human Resources Management department is responsible for Human Resources advisory services and communities of expertise; Global mobility, emergencies and National Society engagement (Talent engagement); Human Resources solutions, services and systems, and Occupational health, safety and wellbeing. 
The Global Humanitarian Services and Supply Chain 
Management department provides quality- and value-assured supply chain support to IFRC and 
National Society response programmes around the world, while the IFRC Global Service Centre provides IT support, logistics and other administrative services.
Regional Offices
The IFRC has five Regional Offices which are a direct extension of the headquarters structures. 
The IFRC’s Africa Regional Office is in Nairobi, Kenya. 
In the Americas, the Regional Office is located in 
Panama City, Panama. In Asia Pacific, the Regional 
Office is in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. For Europe, the Regional Office is in Budapest, Hungary. The 
Middle East North Africa Regional Office is located in Beirut, Lebanon.
Under the guidance of headquarters, the Regional 
Offices ensure strategic and operational coordination at regional level, making sure that the right support is provided to National Societies in their respective countries. 
Technical teams and functional experts at regional level work with and follow the guidance provided by the respective functional Director in headquarters to ensure global alignment across the IFRC. 
Comprehensive guidance and support are provided to the delegations and the National Societies in the furtherance of their work. 
Each Regional Office provides leadership in IFRC’s 
National Society development, humanitarian diplomacy, and operational and strategic coordination support to its member National Societies. 
The functions include strengthening National 
Societies through capacity-building activities; supporting disaster response operations and assisting and/or providing surge capacity where needed; resource management; development of country and regional strategies; coordination of National 
Societies in the region; and representation of the 
IFRC at regional and country levels, where required.
Delegations
IFRC Delegations at country level allow the IFRC to provide individually tailored support to National 
Societies – strengthening their capacities, ensuring strategic and operational coordination, promoting their integrity, and positioning them as strong and effective local actors in line with the IFRC’s support of greater localization in resilience building and humanitarian response.

[Page 19]
About the IFRC
The Heads of the delegations lead the IFRC’s support for National Society development, humanitarian diplomacy, accountability, resource development, coordination and all other work to enhance the capacities and services in each National Society’s domestic context. 
Heads of delegations also act as ambassadors for the IFRC, representing the organization and the IFRC network within the country and sub-region, and in dialogues with internal and external partners. 
Each one promotes a “One IFRC” approach designed to link strategic and operational objectives at country level, while promoting and reinforcing the 
National Society’s role as auxiliary to its government.
The IFRC’s presence at country level allows it to support National Societies in their continuous development, in their long-term work, and in their front-line emergency response to disasters and crises. 
All country-level support is designed to boost localization by strengthening National Society capacities, not only in emergency response and long-term resilience programming, but also in compliance and accountability. 
IFRC DELEGATIONS MAP
Red Cross and Red Crescent 
Reference Centres
The IFRC network also benefits from the knowledge and skill of some 30 expert global, regional and 
National Society-led Reference Centres, hubs and networks around the world, each focused on achieving excellence in a specific area of humanitarian work (see Reference Centres section for full details).
Many are hosted by individual National Societies or global and regionally by the IFRC.
In 2024, the work of these expert bodies will be more fully integrated into Red Cross and Red Crescent plans and programmes, in line with Strategy 2030’s ambition for the IFRC to operate more efficiently as a distributed network.
Headquarters
Representative office
Regional office
Country Cluster Delegation
Country Delegation

[Page 20]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
MOBILIZING INVESTMENT BY RESULT
IFRC 2024 IFRC funding requirement: 2.0 billion Swiss francs
IFRC Network 2024 funding requirement: 3.5 billion Swiss francs
The IFRC network’s total funding requirement for 
2024 is 3.5 billion Swiss francs, of which we seek 
2.0 billion Swiss francs to be channelled through the IFRC. This funding requirement is presented in the table below by: (i) strategic priorities; (ii) enabling functions; (iii) special purpose funds, and (iv) ongoing and estimated emergency appeals.
2024 FUNDING REQUIREMENTS   IFRC funding requirement 
Participating 
National 
Society funding requirement Host National 
Society funding requirement 
Strategic Priorities      
Climate and environment
64.4 16.7 49.4 
Disasters and crises
145.7 100.6 706.5 
Health and wellbeing
127.7 116.9 194.2 
Migration and displacement
85.4 28.0 34.0 
Values, power and inclusion
35.8 15.0 89.7 
Sub-total Strategic Priorities
459.1 277.2 1,073.8 
Enabling Functions      
Strategic and operational coordination, National 
Society development, Humanitarian diplomacy, 
Accountability  198.6  27.5  80.3
Sub-total Enabling Functions
198.6 27.5 80.3 
Special Purpose Funds  
DREF
85.0 
Capacity Building Fund
17.0 
NSIA
10.0 
Sub-total Special Purpose Funds
112.0 
Emergency appeals  
Current Emergency Appeals rolling over to 2024
410.0 
Ukraine and impacted countries crisis 323.0 
Türkiye Earthquake
267.0
Estimation of new emergency appeals to be launched in 2024 200.0 
Sub-total emergency appeals 1,200.0 
GRAND TOTAL IFRC 2024
1,969.7
Participating National Society funding requirements
366.6 
Host National Societies domestic funding requirements
1,154.1 
GRAND TOTAL IFRC NETWORK 2024
3,490.4
CHF millions

[Page 21]
Mobilizing investment by result
The IFRC supports National Societies to deliver programmes and develop as strong and accountable local organizations. All funds raised by the IFRC are used for this purpose. Working closely with them, the IFRC raises funds for and on behalf of 
National Societies. 
The IFRC relies on contributions from partners to achieve this support. 
The IFRC raises funds for its support of National 
Societies, delivered through its five strategic priorities and four enabling functions. Funds come from statutory contributions from National Societies, voluntary contributions and donations, supplementary service fees and cost recoveries. 
The IFRC also raises funds on behalf of National 
Societies, which are passed to them for their programming, ensuring strengthened, compliance- assured localization. Funds come from emergency appeals, global platforms and IFRC brokered partnerships for National Societies. 
To be able to serve the needs of its member 
National Societies, the IFRC seeks to increase regular resources funding and reduce project funding. 
This is in line with the IFRC’s desire to reinforce the central role of National Societies in programme delivery and its own mandate of supporting National 
Societies. Regular resources are crucial to support the core mandate of the IFRC. Increasing them also creates more space for the IFRC’s coordination within the network to ensure better efficiency and effectiveness when working together. 
Another priority is the strengthening of IFRC- pooled funds including the Disaster Response 
Emergency Fund, the Capacity Building Fund, the National Society Investment Alliance and the Empress Shôken Fund. These funds are essential to provide both short-term support emergencies and longer-term support for National 
Society development. 
The IFRC’s large-scale platforms are the conduits for funding National Society programming in specific 
Mexico 2023 © Mexican Red Cross

[Page 22]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
Afghanistan 2023 © Meer Abdullah Rasikh /

[Page 23]
Mobilizing investment by result thematic areas like climate, water and sanitation, and migration. They enable partners to engage with the IFRC in these areas, connecting their funding to specific pieces of work that contribute to global objectives and results. 
The IFRC will continue its prioritization of emergency appeals for large-scale emergencies, bringing together funding to support the life-saving work of National Societies. 
Finally, the IFRC is working to leverage its international organization status to provide op- portunities for funding that National Societies may not have access to. The IFRC facilitated 58 million 
Swiss francs in funding to National Societies through this access in 2022. 
Working with the IFRC helps partners to respond to global needs – supporting localized thematic work in multiple countries and National Societies at the same time. These brokered partnerships also support economies of scale, as the IFRC’s coordination work and the learning that takes place through the network enables replication of programming rather than starting over with small individual projects each time. Working with the IFRC also ensures increased accountability, coupled with reduced administrative burden for partners.
The IFRC understands that traditional humanitarian partners will not be able to keep pace with steeply increasing humanitarian needs. It is, therefore, engaging in a disciplined approach to diversify its income. This includes increasing engagement with the private sector, developing partnerships with new governments, developing innovative partnerships and innovative finance products. Developing new and innovative partnerships enables the IFRC to leverage and multiply the investments from our traditional partners, increasing our ability to support National Societies to deliver services at scale and respond to increasing needs. 
FOCUSING FUNDS WHERE NEEDS EXISTS
When prioritizing support and allocations to 
National Societies, the IFRC considers numerous factors – first and foremost, the level of need/ vulnerability in the country, and including the mandate and capacity of the National Society, level of 
IFRC presence for support, possibility to transition between longer-term and emergency support, and the presence of other humanitarian actors and their role in the country. 
In the Strategic Priorities section of this global plan, you will find some comparisons of the IFRC’s funding requirements and some of the major humanitarian indexes. This comparison shows that the IFRC is investing in the areas with high levels of need and vulnerability. 
2024 IFRC FUNDING REQUIREMENTS GEOGRAPHICALLY  
Climate and environment
Disasters and crises
Health and wellbeing
Migration and displacement
Values, power and inclusion
Enabling functions
Total 
Africa 21.2 40.6 46.2 7.5 8.2 15.2 138.9 
Americas
2.4 7.0 8.2 5.3 1.7 7.7 32.3 
Asia Pacific
12.4 26.3 16.3 5.5 4.7 16.8 82.0 
Europe
5.6 17.1 11.6 36.5 3.6 15.1 89.5 
MENA
9.4 27.8 21.9 11.4 1.8 14.3 86.6 
Global
13.5 26.9 23.5 19.2 15.7 129.5 228.4 
Total
64.5 145.7 127.7 85.4 35.7

[Page 24]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
TOP FUNDING REQUIREMENTS BY COUNTRY FOR EACH THEMATIC AREA
Climate and environment
Country
IFRC funding requirement
Participating 
National 
Society funding requirement
Host National 
Society funding requirement
Total network funding requirement
Kenya 0.4 0.3 
7.5 8.2 
Bangladesh 3.0 
3.2 
1.7 
7.9 
Mozambique - 
- 7.5 7.5 
South Sudan 5.0 
1.9 0.5 
7.4
Afghanistan 
5.0 
1.0 - 
6.0 
Disasters and crises
Country
IFRC funding requirement
Participating 
National 
Society funding requirement
Host National 
Society funding requirement
Total network funding requirement
Iran, Islamic Republic of - - 
573.0 
573.0 
Ethiopia 12.5 
6.5 
14.9 
33.9 
Syrian Arab Republic 21.4 
8.6 - 
30.0 
Türkiye 
5.0 
16.0 - 
21.0 
Lebanon - 
5.3 15.2 
20.5 
Health and wellbeing
Country
IFRC funding requirement
Participating 
National 
Society funding requirement
Host National 
Society funding requirement
Total network funding requirement
Lebanon 
0.4 
14.4 
50.5
65.3 
Iran, Islamic Republic of 
0.4 
1.5 25.0 26.9 
Ethiopia 
7.5 
4.2 
9.3 21.0 
Bangladesh 
1.7 3.8 
13.3 18.8 
Congo, the Democratic 
Republic of the 10.0 
1.0 
6.2 
17.2 
Migration and displacement
Country
IFRC funding requirement
Participating 
National 
Society funding requirement
Host National 
Society funding requirement
Total network funding requirement
Türkiye 30.0 
4.3 - 34.3 
Ethiopia 1.3 
0.2 
3.7 
5.2 
Egypt 5.0 - - 
5.0
Colombia - 
0.2 4.6 4.8 
Bangladesh 
0.8 2.8 
0.6

[Page 25]
Mobilizing investment by result
Values, power and inclusion
Country
IFRC funding requirement
Participating 
National 
Society funding requirement
Host National 
Society funding requirement
Total network funding requirement
Russian Federation - - 
38.3 
38.3 Iran, Islamic Republic of - - 24.3 24.3 Colombia - - 
5.1 
5.1 Ethiopia 
1.3 
0.1 
1.9
3.3 Afghanistan 2.0 
1.0 - 
3.0 
TOP 10 PARTICIPATING NATIONAL SOCIETIES PROVIDING SUPPORT BILATERALLY
National Society
Amount CHF millions*
Danish Red Cross
56.3
Norwegian Red Cross
44.9
Luxembourg Red Cross
28.8
British Red Cross
28.1
Japanese Red Cross Society
26.4
German Red Cross
24.6
Swedish Red Cross
23.7
Spanish Red Cross
23.3
Belgian Red Cross
14.7
French Red Cross
12.8
TOP 10 COUNTRIES RECEIVING SUPPORT BILATERALLY 
FROM PARTICIPATING NATIONAL SOCIETIES
National Society
Amount CHF millions*
Ukraine 
64.7
Türkiye 
25.2
Lebanon 
21.2
Syrian Arab Republic 
18.5
Burkina Faso 
16.9
Bangladesh 
15.5
Ethiopia 
14.5
Afghanistan 
12.9
Somalia 
10.2
Congo, the Democratic Republic of the 
9.3
*(from 2024 unified planning process)

[Page 26]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
REGULAR RESOURCES 
As a membership organization, the IFRC’s purpose is to support the work and development of 191 
National Societies around the world. To live up to the trust National Societies have placed in the IFRC, we must be ambitious, focused and work at scale to achieve humanitarian impact. To do this, we need flexibility in the funding we receive.
Regular resources are funds that have no earmarking. 
Regular resources consist of statutory and voluntary contributions from members, donations from partners, cost recoveries and other flexible income.
ALLOCATION OF REGULAR RESOURCES 
The IFRC Secretary General holds decision-making authority in the allocation of regular resources with input from the Senior Leadership Team. The process begins with an initial analysis of planned or anticipated thematic and emergency work for the coming year and identification of gaps or difficulties in funding specific areas. This takes place at the end of the previous year and is based on the IFRC’s 
Plan and Budget, annual plans and ongoing emergency appeals.
Regular resources are also vital for the IFRC at headquarter and country level, to support work in core mandate areas and ensuring timely accompaniment to National Societies in times of stress and peace. 
When considering potential areas for allocation, priority is given to strengthening field presence and 
National Society development.
After allocations are made, there is a regular review process. Each quarter, the IFRC reviews completed and intended spending, identifies costs savings, and analyses events that may have changed priorities.
Regular resources may be re-directed at this time to reflect changing needs. Having the flexibility to reallocate these funds is another reason why regular resources are so important.
IMPORTANCE OF REGULAR RESOURCES
Regular resources are essential for the IFRC to deliver on its mandate. This mandate is delivered through the following functions:
Strategic and operational coordination 
When crises surpass the capacity of the host National 
Society to respond, the IFRC coordinates the network’s response when international assistance is sought. The IFRC’s coordination also supports 
National Societies to connect with and learn from one another to capitalize on existing capacities, reduce overlap, and make the network stronger.
National Society development 
The growing demands from authorities and other actors on the role of National Societies as auxiliary to the public authorities represents an opportunity for principles of humanitarian action to be promoted. 
The IFRC’s principal objective is to support the work of National Societies. This means helping National 
Societies to become strong, effective local organizations that are trusted, accountable, and able to carry out programmes for at-risk communities at scale.
Humanitarian diplomacy 
The IFRC represents the network to influence global discussions and decisions in the interests of at-risk communities. The IFRC also engages in advocacy to advance priorities for vulnerable people and supports National Societies to engage in domestic advocacy efforts.
The IFRC’s status as an international organization means that we can facilitate access for National 
Societies to global discussions and funding. The 
IFRC also leverages its international organization status to facilitate access to resources that National 
Societies would not normally have access to.
Accountability and agility
We are accountable to the people we serve; our donors and supporters; and to our IFRC network, staff and volunteers. The IFRC must ensure

[Page 27]
Mobilizing investment by result accountability – operating always with integrity in accordance with our Fundamental Principles and in line with the applicable statutory texts, rules, policies and procedures. The IFRC’s accountability work includes areas such as risk management, digital transformation, audit and investigations, safeguarding and integrity strengthening, to name a few.
CONTRIBUTION TO HUMANITARIAN 
IMPACT
Regular resources play a direct role in contributing to the humanitarian impact of National Societies. 
The IFRC is investing these resources where they are most needed. 
It is notable that all countries that score ‘very high’ on the INFORM Risk Register are supported by regular resources. This enables the IFRC to ensure continuity of support to those National 
Societies regardless of programmatic funding or emergencies. In fact, 39 of the top 40 countries highest on the index’s risk ranking receive regular resources from the IFRC. 
As the IFRC pursues an ambition to grow regular resources, it is also prioritizing their allocation to the country level, where the IFRC offices provide the most direct support to National Societies. Regular resources enable support through the continuum of a National Society’s work. This includes:
 •
Strengthening the National Societies’ acts/laws in each country and reinforcing relations with authorities at local and national levels to ensure the delivery of services, based on principles of humanitarian action. •
Strategic and operational planning to ensure effective organizations and programmes that can better assist at-risk people and reinforcing the distributed network of local branches in each country.
 •
Needs assessments and community engagement and accountability to ensure emergency services reach those most in need and have impact.
 •
Emergency appeals to secure international support when needed in response to disasters and crises, so that National Societies can deliver life-saving services.
 •
Technical support in specific areas of programming to ensure the needs of at-risk people can be met where a National Society may lack sufficient experience or capacity.
 •
Coordination within the IFRC network to ensure that the host National Society receives the support it needs in the most effective and efficient manner.
REGULAR RESOURCES FUNDING REQUIREMENT 2024  
CHF millions
Statutory contributions
34.8
Donations
56.0
Other income
4.2
Cost recoveries
45.0
Total resources

[Page 28]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
REGULAR RESOURCES PROJECTED 
INCOME FOR 2024
Statutory contributions are memberships fees from all 191 member National Societies.
Unrestricted donations come mostly from 
State donors.
Other income consists mainly of realized finance income, including interest on funds held by the IFRC.
Cost recoveries include indirect costs recovered from programmes and operations as expenditure is incurred.
REGULAR RESOURCES PROJECTED 
ALLOCATIONS FOR 2024
Regular resources are dedicated to fulfilling the 
IFRC’s core functions. These are the vital functions that the IFRC has identified to support and facilitate the humanitarian and development work of National 
Societies. This works focuses on ensuring that 
National Societies can deliver effective and appropriate life-saving programmes and longer-term humanitarian services, and supports the development of their capacities as strong, accountable local actors.
While most of this work falls under the IFRC’s 
Enabling Functions, where the support is specific to a thematic area, the funding is captured within that 
Strategic Priority.
However, some of the priority areas where the 
IFRC will seek impact in 2024 include enhancing 
Membership and Movement coordination mechanisms to improve efficiency and effectiveness in local and international humanitarian action and encourage greater trust and accountability; the new certification process for the revised Organizational 
Capacity Assessment to help National Societies define and progress in their development journey and the use of the capacity-building fund to advance progress; the development of a framework for humanitarian diplomacy in emergencies; fundraising for and with National Societies and providing them access to funding opportunities vis-á-vis the IFRC International Organization status, advancing the Enterprise Resource Planning project to ensure the IFRC is fit for purpose and has the tools to work effectively; helping National Societies to increase their legal frameworks including the support to governments to improve their disaster laws, increase actions around digital maturity so that they can work and engage with their communities in the ways that communities want; improve country-level investigation capacities and strengthen the IFRC’s own internal control frameworks; continue to strengthen safeguarding measures; and continue to strengthen community engagement and accountability for better accountability to those we serve. 
For further examples of the work these funds will support in 2024, please see the Enabling Functions section of this plan.
REGULAR RESOURCES AMBITION
The IFRC is working with partners and donors to grow its regular resources. As a high level of earmarking continues with most voluntary funds provided, the 
IFRC aims to maintain its level of allocation of regular resources in 2024. 
However, the goal is to increase this vital funding so that the IFRC can strengthen its field presence and country-level support to National Societies, adding extra positions in needed thematic areas, reinforcing our work in all of the fields mentioned above.
The IFRC works closely with its partners to ensure the trust and level of information necessary to secure this type of funding. For example, we continue to improve our reporting, both on the use of regular resources and our work in general, to ensure that partners can see the impact of the funds they provide to the IFRC and, more importantly, their impact for National Societies.

[Page 30]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
CLIMATE AND 
ENVIRONMENT
Reducing the current and future humanitarian impacts of climate and environmental crises, and supporting people to adapt and thrive.
PREPARE AND ADAPT
Scale up climate- smart disaster reduction
Reduce health impacts of climate change
Enable climateresilient livelihoods and naturebased solutions
Address climate displacement

[Page 31]
Strategic priorities
Top 5 countries for climate work by funding requirement
National Societies signed the Climate and Environment 
Charter for humanitarian organizations
27.2M people reached (FDRS, 2021)
500M people in 100 countries by to be reached by 2027
National Societies working on nature-based solutions
130.5 
CHF network funding requirement
14.8M people to be reached by the network
250M people are better protected from heat in at least 
150 cities and towns coastal cities are supported to adapt to longer-term impacts of climate change including sea level rise
National Societies implement naturebased solutions
4 South Sudan
3 Mozambique
1 Kenya
5 Afghansitan
2 Bangladesh over of the climate mitigation needed to stay below 2°C by 2030 can be provided by Nature-based solutions*
*Griscom, B. W. et al., 2017
250M people are better protected from heat in at least 
150 cities and towns coastal cities are supported to adapt to longer-term impacts of climate change including sea level rise
National Societies implement naturebased solutions
2025 Targets

[Page 32]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
CLIMATE AND ENVIRONMENT
OUR APPROACH
Climate change is a global humanitarian crisis with worsening impacts. Before 2023 had even ended, more than 200 climate- and weather-related disasters had already been recorded worldwide, affecting some 77 million people.
Climate- and weather-related disasters are expected to grow in number, intensity and frequency in 2024, alongside the equally deadly threats of biodiversity loss and pollution.
The IFRC is leading an unprecedented global scale-up of locally led climate-change adaptation actions to build community-level resilience to these disasters.
A global threat requires a global response. But this will only be effective if it begins at local level – in the heart of the communities under threat – and if the necessary funding reaches the communities in greatest need.
TOP 10 IFRC NETWORK FUNDING REQUIREMENT FOR CLIMATE AND ENVIRONMENT by country compared to the risk category on the INFORM Climate Change Risk Index 
Country
IFRC network funding requirement (CHF millions)
Risk category 
Kenya 8.4 
Medium
South Sudan 8.1 
Very high
Bangladesh 7.9 
High
Mozambique 7.5 
Very high
Afghanistan 6.0 
Very high
Ethiopia 5.3 
Very high
Egypt 5.0 
Medium
Mali 3.8 
Very high
Nigeria 3.7 
Very high
Colombia 2.8 
High to be reached by the network
27.7M people
IFRC network funding requirement
130.5M
CHF
IFRC funding requirement 
64.4M

[Page 33]
Strategic priorities
OUR PLAN FOR 2024
In many ways, all 191 National Societies are already responding to the impacts of climate-related disasters and threats - although only some are doing so with holistic climate-specific programmes.
In 2023, the IFRC and more than 20 National 
Societies embarked on a well-defined Climate Action 
Journey. This journey supports the implementation of locally led adaptation actions that increase the resilience of individuals, communities and institutions. In 2024, this will be expanded to include more 
National Societies in the work to build their capacities to better support communities at risk around the world. This work will encompass preparedness, anticipatory action, risk reduction and response to climate-related disasters, as well as longer-term climate adaptation programmes for resilience with 
National Societies in Bangladesh, Cameroon, 
Chad, Ethiopia, Honduras, Indonesia, Jamaica, 
Malawi, Nepal, Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, 
South Sudan, Tanzania, Timor Leste, Türkiye, 
Uganda and Vietnam.
The IFRC and the Red Cross Red Crescent Climate 
Centre will also support National Societies to form partnerships for action and establish a climate-risk informed vision and institutional priorities, based on 
National Climate Risk Assessments and the development of multi-year climate strategies. In addition, at least three National Societies will receive support to carry out an ecosystem assessment.
The Climate Journey supports the implementation of community-based actions contributing to increase the resilience of individuals, communities and institutions.
At the same time, the IFRC will support an additional 
20 Climate Champion National Societies to bridge policy and practice on humanitarian climate action. 
Climate Champions are National Society ambassadors for the IFRC network’s climate action and resilience-building leadership. The Champions will be supported and expanded in 2024 to further grow the knowledge, expertise and leadership of National 
Societies on climate action at policy and programmatic levels.
These activities will allow the IFRC network to better represent climate impacts on the most affected communities and understand how the humanitarian system, from local to global, is responding to those impacts and how existing financial mechanisms are operating. This multistakeholder approach will build bottom-up knowledge sharing and solutions through a new Climate Resilience partnership that will build on studies presented at previous 
COP meetings.
The IFRC will also champion learning, and strengthen institutional systems and tools. It will seek out new financing opportunities for well-coordinated community level work in early warning, anticipatory action, risk reduction and climate adaptation.
Global Climate Resilience Programme
The holistic, multi-year Global Climate Resilience 
Programme will support more than 100 National 
Societies in the most climate-vulnerable countries to undertake climate-smart disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation.
This includes reducing the health impacts of climate change, addressing climate-related displacement and enabling climate-resilient livelihoods and ecosystem services.
The programme aims to help people adapt their lives and livelihoods to our changing climate, protect themselves from the increasing risks of disasters caused by climate change, and become more aware of, and resilient to, current and future climate shocks.
It brings together the expertise, experience and reach of National Societies already working in disaster-risk reduction and climate-change adaptation, both nationally and internationally, as well as 
IFRC reference centres and hubs, alongside strong engagement with Government authorities, academia and domestic climate experts.
A locally led USAID climate adaptation project that looks at all dimensions of the programme has already started in Malawi, Nigeria and Pakistan. 
It will be rolled out in a further nine countries in 
Africa, Americas and Asia Pacific in 2024.
The USAID Heat and Cities project is building the climate resilience of urban communities, particularly to extreme heat and coastal threats, through expanding risk knowledge and strengthening local action in cities in Bangladesh, Honduras, Indonesia and Tanzania.

[Page 34]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
A new Climate Resilience partnership is being established to build bottom-up solutions. It will seek to better understand and illustrate the humanitarian impacts of climate change on the most affected communities, and to better understand how the humanitarian system, from local to global, is responding to those impacts – including how existing financial mechanisms are operating. This will build studies presented during COP28.
In the Americas, environmental screening capacity (NEAT+) is being pursued in Colombia, Costa Rica, 
El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Panama, 
Trinidad and Tobago, and Venezuela, while Cuba, 
Dominican Republic and Jamaica are in the process of developing their capacity to do so.
Urban resilience
Climate and environment are intrinsically linked to urban resilience. More than half of the world’s populations (56 per cent) live in urban areas. The world’s cities account for 67–76 per cent of global energy use, and for 71–76 per cent of human-made CO2 emissions.
In 2024, the IFRC will continue working with National 
Societies to develop solutions that will reduce the urban impacts of heatwaves, floods and environmental degradation such as waste and pollution. 
This will build on existing work on heat and coastal cities, with a specific focus on under-served urban communities at risk of extreme heat.
Nature-based solutions
In 2024, the IFRC network will continue to play a leading role in the promotion and adoption of nature-based solutions in humanitarian contexts.
National Societies will be supported in using nature-based solutions to protect people and ecosystems at risk from the climate crisis and to reduce disaster risks. Activities can include protecting and restoring forests and wetlands to reduce the risk of flooding, mangroves and coral reefs for coastal protection, or the creation of urban green spaces to reduce the impact of heatwaves.
Training and programming on nature-based solutions in humanitarian contexts will be scaled up throughout 2024, including through strengthened partnerships at national level.
Pan-African tree planting and care initiative
In Africa, National Societies are responding to deforestation and land degradation – two factors that increase communities’ vulnerability to droughts and floods – with a Pan-African tree planting and care initiative. The initiative aims to plant five billion trees on the continent.
The focus countries are Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, 
Lesotho, Madagascar, Mali, Nigeria, Rwanda, 
Sierra Leone and South Africa.
The initiative contributes to food security by protecting and improving the very basis of food production – soil and ecosystem health. Collabora- tive programmes have already been co-designed with the African Union and IGAD.
Climate and Environment Charter
The Climate and Environment Charter was created for the humanitarian sector by the IFRC and the 
ICRC. It aims to mobilize climate-change adaptation, mitigation and environmental sustainability commitments from all 191 National Societies and the broader humanitarian community, bringing credibility and impetus to the climate and environmental ambitions of the whole humanitarian sector.
In 2024, the IFRC will be involved in supporting the establishment of a Charter Secretariat, which will provide technical support to Charter signatories, including over 130 National Societies, to set targets and deliver on their commitments. The IFRC has already made several commitments through the 
Charter, including a commitment to reduce the network’s environmental footprint and achieve greater sustainability in its programmes and operations.
“Greening the Red”
Work will continue in 2024 to reduce the environmental footprint of the IFRC and member National 
Societies, in line with Charter commitments to “green the red”, and reduce current and future damage.
This will include the development of an IFRC strategy/ framework on the environment, including support for the development of environmental policies and promoting carbon accounting across the network.
Greening programmes and operations in 2024 will include work on the ‘greening’ of logistics and supply chains, integrating the environment into

[Page 35]
Strategic priorities
National Society preparedness, systematic inclusion of greening approaches in operational responses and National Society development processes, and fostering peer-to-peer exchange.
Enhanced support will equally be given to environmental programming, such as supporting National 
Societies with innovative pilots on plastic waste and the circular economy.
A process for developing a comprehensive climate and environment awareness and behaviour change package was initiated in 2023 to engage youth and volunteers. In the coming year, the IFRC will work with National Societies to finalize the package.
SPOTLIGHT  GLOBAL CLIMATE RESILIENCE PLATFORM
The unprecedented global threat of the climate crisis demands mobilization of local efforts at an unprecedented scale.
To finance this work, the IFRC and its member 
National Societies co-created the Global Climate 
Resilience Platform, which was launched at COP27 in November 2022 and has been building momentum ever since.
While the platform supports all IFRC climate programming, it specifically focuses on three areas with the highest potential for impact. These include:
1. Anticipatory Action and early warning, including partnerships with UN organizations under the Early Warning for All initiative.
2. Social Safety Nets and Shock Responsive 
Social protection, which is closely linked to 
IFRC work in anticipatory action and humanitarian cash programming.
3. Nature-based solutions, including partnerships with organizations such as the World 
Wildlife Fund, the International Union for 
Conservation of Nature, and the Nature Conservancy to integrate nature-based solutions into disaster-risk reduction and climate-adaptation strategies.
The IFRC aims to raise one billion Swiss francs across humanitarian, development, private sector and innovative financing funding streams, and channel that directly to communities in the 100 most climate-vulnerable countries to build their resilience over five years. This requires an important shift in how partners approach financing climate work, including bridging the divides between humanitarian and development funding.
Partners at the forefront of this work, who have contributed nearly 70 million Swiss francs so far, include the Netherlands government, the Italian government, the United States government (USAID), the United Kingdom government, the 
Met Office, CLARE (with Canada) – east and west Africa, the Spanish government, the 
Irish government and DG CLIMA (European 
Commission).
Their investment in local programming and initiatives through support to the Global Climate Resilience 
Platform will support at least 500 million people in increasing their resilience to the impacts of climate change and enhancing their adaptive capacities in the most climate-vulnerable countries. Real change is possible with investment in local and sustainable solutions.

[Page 36]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
DISASTERS 
AND CRISES
Helping communities reduce risk to prevent disasters where we can and helping them to prepare for everything we cannot prevent.
ANTICIPATE AND RECOVER
Build resilience to future shocks
Anticipate to reduce needs
Respond where there are needs

[Page 37]
Strategic priorities
70% of DREF allocations are made for climate- and weather-related events
8.2M people reached through the ECHO 
Programmatic Partnership in 24 countries
Surge deployments ongoing responses to emergencies in 2024XXX
National Societies engaged in PER process
952.8 
CHF network funding requirement
14.8M people to be reached by the network
50M people per year reached with services and cash and voucher assistance for emergency response and recovery
National Societies engage in preparedness and capacity building processes
500M 
Swiss francs mobilized per year through IFRC for 
National Society responses to crises and disasters
On average
50M people per year reached with services, and cash and voucher assistance for emergency response and recovery
National Societies engaged in preparedness and capacity-building processes
500M 
Swiss francs mobilized per year through the IFRC for National Society responses to crises and disasters
Top 5 countries for disaster work by funding requirement
2025 Targets
1 Iran
3 Syria
4 Türkiye 
5 Lebanon
2 Ethiopia

[Page 38]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
DISASTERS AND CRISES
OUR APPROACH
The ongoing rise in the numbers and intensity of disasters and crises worldwide continues to test local, national and international response mechanisms, and challenges the IFRC network to respond at scale to the needs of affected people.
With a future that promises more climate-driven disasters, and complex and protracted crises, the 
IFRC network is adapting its services and building 
National Society capacities in risk reduction, anticipatory action, preparedness and early warning early action.
Collective action within the IFRC network provides a unique opportunity to marry locally led humanitarian action with regional and global surge support to ensure that National Societies and the IFRC can respond to crises no matter the scale.
This approach puts skills and resources where they are needed most – at ground level, in the heart of communities, and guided by local actors such as 
National Societies. The system draws on the expertise and international influence of the IFRC network in support of local humanitarian action that is effective, principled and accountable.
TOP 10 IFRC NETWORK FUNDING REQUIREMENT FOR DISASTERS AND CRISES by country compared to the INFORM Severity Index
Country
IFRC network funding requirement (CHF millions)
INFORM Severity Index 
Iran, Islamic Republic of 573.0 
High
Ethiopia 34.5 
High
Syrian Arab Republic 21.4 
Very High
Türkiye 21.0 
High
Lebanon 19.3 
High
Kenya 17.6 
High
Yemen 15.8 
Bangladesh 4.4 
Very High
Burkina Faso 14.4 
High
Congo, the Democratic 
Republic of the 9.3 
Very High to be reached by the network
42.4M people
IFRC network funding requirement
952.8M
CHF
IFRC funding requirement 
145.7M

[Page 39]
Strategic priorities
OUR PLAN FOR 2024
In 2024, the IFRC network will build its collective capacities for disaster and crisis response, ensure that greater access to information will empower collective network collaboration, and focus on results with more agile planning and budgeting.
Disaster-risk reduction will remain a cornerstone of the IFRC network’s approach, with a strong focus on supporting marginalized and hard-to-reach communities in fragile settings.
With the support of its partners, the IFRC will ensure that the global network can anticipate, to reduce existing humanitarian needs, respond effectively where needs emerge, and invest long-term to build resilience against future needs.
Disaster Preparedness and Readiness
The IFRC has acquired significant knowledge and expertise concerning preparedness and readiness to respond to disasters and crises.
In 2024, the IFRC will finalize a new emergency response framework that will bring together a comprehensive approach to increase speed, agility and innovation in emergencies and greater shared accountability for the response.
The surge system will be reinforced and, in line with the localization agenda, will be strengthened emphasizing the role of local branches and national and regional disasters-and-crises response teams. 
This will enable greater expansion of knowledge, expertise, languages and cultural sensitivity in Red 
Cross and Red Crescent response teams.
The prepositioning of humanitarian stocks will be prioritized in the most hazard-prone areas and will be greener and more environmentally friendly to reduce the IFRC network’s carbon footprint. Work will continue to innovate in this area in 2024.
Early warning and early action
The IFRC has already adapted its high-impact disaster-risk reduction work to place greater emphasis on science-based anticipation and early warning/ early action.
In 2024, the IFRC will continue to work with National 
Societies to develop and implement National 
Society early action plans for an increasing number 
ONGOING RESPONSES TO EMERGENCIES IN 2024 
CHF 1.0B
Total amount for requested Ops continuing into 2024
39.5M
Total people to be reached by Ops continuing into 2024
Total Ops continuing in 2024
Total EAs continuing in 2024
Total DREFs continuing in 2024
Emergency Appeal
DREF
FBA
Number of people targeted
0.05M

[Page 40]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
Guatemala 2023 © Guatemalan Red

[Page 41]
Strategic priorities of hazards, and co-lead/host initiatives such as the Anticipation Hub, Risk-informed Early Action 
Partnership and the preparedness for response pillar of the Early Warnings for All Initiative.
The IFRC and the United Nations are accelerating action to ensure that everyone on Earth is protected by early warnings by 2027. Support for the roll-out of the Early Warnings for All initiative (EW4All) will be a priority in 2024, including through 
IFRC’s global leadership of Pillar 4 on preparedness for response to warnings.
IFRC will also be actively engaged in Pillars 1 and 
3 of the initiative, namely Disaster Risk Knowledge and Warning Dissemination and Communication respectively. This work will be carried out in close collaboration with reference centre experts at the 
Global Disaster Preparedness Centre, the Red Cross 
Red Crescent Climate Centre and Anticipation Hub.
In Ethiopia, Sudan (tbc), South Sudan and Uganda, 
National Societies will advance the ambitions of 
Early Warnings for All initiative through the implementation of the Water at the Heart of Climate 
Action programme, with support from the IFRC, the Netherlands Red Cross and the Climate 
Centre, and in partnership with the United Nations 
Office for Disaster Risk Reduction and the World 
Meteorological Organization.
National Societies will be supported to scale up their community-based disaster-risk reduction activities in 2024. This will be ensured through measurement of community risk and resilience (including using the IFRC’s renowned Enhanced 
Vulnerability and Capacity Assessment) and devel- opment of risk-informed community action plans that are aligned with national climate-risk assessments and strategies.
Early warning is of limited use without early action. 
The IFRC will focus on country and community level support for people-centred, locally led and inclusive approaches.
The IFRC will ensure that related activities are linked with 
Community 
Engagement and 
Accountability (CEA) and cash programming so that people receiving early warnings have the skills and resources needed to act on them.
Disaster Response Emergency Fund (DREF)
The DREF remains an essential flexible emergency funding source for National Societies and a highly cost-effective way for donors and partners to support local humanitarian action. It has been revitalized for it to be easier for National Societies to receive the resources they need to manage local disaster risks.
In 2024, the IFRC will continue increasing the 
DREF capacity to be able to reach more people in need through enhanced support to our National 
Societies. The IFRC is seeking 85 million Swiss francs to finance the DREF.
The IFRC DREF will also raise its capacity to reach people before the disaster strike with the increase of the Anticipatory Action Pillar of the DREF, aiming ultimately in 2025 to represent 25 per cent of the fund.
The IFRC DREF will also continue being innovative by implementing its newly created Insurance mechanism allowing it to diversify its source of income and outsourcing some important risks.
In 2024, the DREF will continue to develop and strengthen its accountability, compliance and risk- management processes and tools. This will allow the IFRC to ensure that risks are monitored, mitigated, as well as communicated and documented in a systematic way, in line with the overall IFRC Risk 
Management Policy.
Accountability and compliance tools such as the 
DREF Issue and Risk Register and the quarterly compliance review will continue to be refined to reflect partner expectations. In addition, a robust control framework will be developed.
Disaster management
In 2024, the IFRC will lead a complete reimagining of the network’s local to global disaster management system, enhancing regional- and country-level anticipation, response and recovery capacity and risk management in operations.
This work will be in line with the IFRC’s National 
Society Preparedness Framework, strengthening local capacities for multi-hazard and multi-sectoral preparedness actions. National Societies from the

[Page 42]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
Americas will continue advancing in analyzing and revising their response capacity in a systematic manner. For example, the Honduras Red Cross is enhancing preparedness for response actions, strengthening technical units’ response capacity, conducting a simulation to test the National response plan, extending its emergency operations centre network to additional regions. enhancing the use of digital formats and information management, and strengthening search and rescue teams and equipment at headquarters and branches.
National Societies’ needs will continue to drive IFRC priorities as they respond to changing contexts, particularly in complex settings and protracted crises.
The IFRC will create a clear approach for the network’s support to National Societies operating in fragile and complex settings in 2024. Research and analysis will be carried out on operational and policy issues related to protracted crises, to better inform 
IFRC action and support.
The Preparedness for Effective Response (PER) approach will continue to foster analysis of National 
Society response capacities, strengths and weaknesses in 2024.
For example, 33 National Societies will be supported through the Pan Africa National Society 
Preparedness and Readiness Initiative. The focus countries are Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, 
Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic Republic of Congo, Equatorial 
Guinea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea (Bissau), 
Guinea (Conakry), Kenya, Lesotho, Madagascar, Mali, 
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mozambique, Namibia, Niger, 
Nigeria, Rwanda, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Somalia, 
South Africa, South Sudan, Tanzania, Uganda and Zambia.
Local action will continue to be prioritized through a redesign of the IFRC’s international surge system, where experienced local or regional personnel are deployed to support a National Society’s response to a disaster or crisis.
IFRC support to National Societies will also be enhanced by a review of the long-running Emergency 
Response Unit (ERU) system, to ensure it meets the needs of National Societies in a fast-changing humanitarian landscape.
Decision making in disasters will also be improved through the Analytical scale up planned in 2024.
An increase in the demand for skills in collecting, managing and analyzing data will be met in 2024 by the development and launch of the Accelerating 
Information Management programme. This initiative will improve information-management capacities across the IFRC network, with a focus on applying data and evidence to improve decision-making processes.
Socio-Economic Empowerment
In 2024, the IFRC network will take a leading role in championing a shift from one-off crisis interventions to sustainable and scalable resilience, through a dedicated new Socio-Economic Empowerment (SEE) function.
This new approach brings together IFRC network experts in Community Engagement and 
Accountability (CEA), Cash and Voucher Assistance, 
Social Protection, and Food Security and Livelihoods.
The SEE model will enable community-driven resilience actions; employment, self-employment and entrepreneurial development; and local economic production and market linkages.
This will have both household-level and community impact, helping National Societies to work with communities to build sustainable resilience to address current and future challenges through both individual and collective action.

[Page 43]
Strategic priorities
SPOTLIGHT  ECHO PROGRAMMATIC PARTNERSHIP
The IFRC and its partners understand that local preparedness is the key to empowering communities large and small, in remote areas and in urban settings.
This is why the ECHO Programmatic Partnership – an innovative and ambitious three-year partnership between the IFRC, many of its member National 
Societies and the European Union – was created to reduce the disaster and health risks communities face every day.
The partnership takes a multi-hazard, multi- sectoral and integrated systems approach to building resilience. Nearly 8.2 million people have already been reached and supported.
The initiative covers disaster-risk management, epidemic and pandemic preparedness and response, as well as humanitarian assistance and protection to people on the move.
The work is designed to be agile and accountable, with human agency and dignity at its heart. 
To this end, many humanitarian needs are met with cash and voucher assistance. Communities are active partners in all programming, with risk communication and community engagement and accountability fully integrated at all stages.
In addition, the Programmatic Partnership supports the localization of humanitarian response by ensuring all related activities are aligned with a National Society’s own priorities and strategies, and will strengthen its institutional and technical capacities.
The programmatic partnership is currently active in 
Africa (Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Chad, Democratic 
Republic of Congo, Eswatini, Madagascar, Somalia, 
South Sudan, Uganda and Zambia), the Americas (Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and 
Panama), Asia Pacific (Bangladesh and Cambodia), 
Europe (Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Ukraine) and in the Middle East and North Africa (Lebanon, occupied Palestinian territory and Yemen.)
The National Societies in these countries are being supported by 12 sister societies from the European 
Union – the Austrian Red Cross, Belgian Red 
Cross, Danish Red Cross, French Red Cross, 
Finnish Red Cross, German Red Cross, Italian 
Red Cross, Luxembourg Red Cross, Netherlands 
Red Cross, Norwegian Red Cross, Spanish Red 
Cross and Swedish Red Cross – and the IFRC.

[Page 44]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
HEALTH AND 
WELLBEING
Ensuring that everyone has access to the health services they need, including during emergencies.
PREVENT AND CARE
Protect health through WASH
Localize health responses in emergencies
Strengthen community- based health

[Page 45]
Strategic priorities
150M mosquito nets distributed per year through programmes we support
3M people reached in epidemic and pandemic preparedness and response through the ECHO 
Programmatic Partnership
2M community health workers trained in Africa by 2026 countries in Africa are part of the regional hunger crisis emergency appeal
National Societies in Asia Pacific are collaborating on mental health and psychosocial support
437.8M 
CHF network funding requirement
14.8M people to be reached by the network
150M people to be reached per year with health services
30M people reached per year with WASH services
15M people to be reached per year with mental health and psychosocial support
20M people to be trained per year in first aid
75% of new infectious diseases in humans originate in domestic animals and wildlife, showing need for community detection and preventative measures
150M people to be reached per year with health services
30M people reached per year with WASH services
15M people to be reached per year with mental health and psychosocial support
20M people to be trained per year in first aid
Top 5 countries for health work by funding requirement
2025 Targets
1 Lebanon
2 Iran
3 Ethiopia
5 Democratic Republic of the Congo
4 Bangladesh

[Page 46]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
HEALTH AND WELLBEING
OUR APPROACH
The IFRC plays a critical role in health and wellbeing through its tailored support to National Societies carrying out community-based programmes and responding to emergencies. Our service-oriented approach supports all National Societies in their efforts to ensure that everyone, everywhere, has access to the health services they need.
Together, the IFRC network reaches millions of people every year to strengthen local resilience in areas such as community health; first aid; water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH); immunization; Mental Health and Psychosocial support (MHPSS), epidemic and pandemic prevention and control to prevent and reduce the spread of diseases such as malaria, cholera, measles or Ebola.
This truly local action provides a critical bridge between at-risk and marginalized communities, and their local health and WASH systems. It also provides a life-saving frontline response in the event of a disaster or crisis.
TOP 10 IFRC NETWORK FUNDING REQUIREMENT FOR HEALTH AND WELLBEING by country compared to their ranking on the Global Health Security Index 
Country
IFRC network funding requirement (CHF millions)
Global Health Security Index ranking
Lebanon 64.4 
Iran, Islamic Republic of 26.9 
Ethiopia 21.4 
Bangladesh 18.7 
Congo, the Democratic 
Republic of the 17.7 
Kenya 16.7 
Yemen 14.5 
Somalia 11.2 
Afghanistan 11.0 
Türkiye 9.5 to be reached by the network
61.4M people
IFRC network funding requirement
438.8M
CHF
IFRC funding requirement 
127.7M

[Page 47]
Strategic priorities
OUR PLAN FOR 2024
In 2024, the IFRC will build on the global support provided to National Societies across the health spectrum in both emergency and development contexts, with a strong focus on community-based impact. The IFRC works with National Societies to support their actions, both in health security and health protection.
The IFRC focuses on checks and balances in programmes to ensure standards of care and transparency, and provides technical expertise when needed, as well as oversight for accountability. The 
IFRC has worked with the World Health Organization to develop guidelines and tools to ensure a standard of care that can be used by National Societies to ensure the highest quality programmes.
Epidemic and Pandemic Preparedness and Response
Informed and resilient communities are the first and best line of defence against outbreaks of disease such as cholera or malaria, or the emergence of new health threats, as seen with COVID-19 or the spread of Ebola on the African continent.
Investment in community-level epidemic and pandemic preparedness must take place before the next disease emerges. Communities and National 
Societies have an essential role to play to prevent outbreaks, detect them early and control their spread.
The IFRC supports the implementation of programmes to strengthen epidemic and pandemic preparedness and response in 27 countries, through the USAID-funded Community Epidemic and 
Pandemic Preparedness Programme (currently active in Cameroon, Democratic Republic of Congo, 
Guinea, Indonesia, Kenya, Sierra Leone and Uganda), and the ECHO Programmatic Partnership (see spotlight in Disasters and crises section). Another 
37 countries have been prioritized for potential engagement in 2024 as part of IFRC plans to scale up work in all regions.
In Latin America, for example, the IFRC will contribute to these goals by training National Societies through the Preparedness, Anticipation, and Early 
Response to Epidemics (PARTE) programme, with a target of having 50 per cent of National Societies completing the training in three years.
In Indonesia, the National Society will support the Government with the implementation of a new regulation on community-based surveillance (CBS) to scale up early detection and early action at community-level throughout the country.
In Kenya, in close coordination with human, animal and environmental health groups, as well as education and disaster-management actors, the National 
Society will engage communities, schools and media outlets through education campaigns and the early detection and response to outbreaks.
Building community health work forces
A strengthened community-based approach is needed to ensure that people can access health services whenever they are needed. At present, more than a billion people worldwide are cut off from these services.
The reasons are many – clinics and hospitals may not be within travel distance, they may not be affordable, or they may not be operational, especially in fragile contexts.
This is where community health workers such as 
National Society volunteers provide a vital service every day. But much more needs to be done to increase their numbers, particularly in places enduring protracted crises.
The IFRC will support National Societies to achieve their goals in 2024 through the scale-up of sustainable and integrated community/home-based care and support programmes, and approaches to address community health needs in all contexts.
This includes the Resilient and Empowered 
African Community Health (REACH) initiative co-created by the IFRC and the Africa Centres for 
Disease Control (see Spotlight for more information).
In 2024, Burkina Faso, Central African Republic, 
Egypt, Gambia, Kenya, Malawi, Mali, Morocco, 
Nigeria, Somalia/Somaliland, South Sudan and Togo will collaborate on microplanning to align 
National Society and government strategies. This will strengthen the capacity of healthcare workers and support communities during health crises. Country 
Support Platforms will be established. The REACH initiative (see Spotlight) will then be implemented based on priorities identified in the microplanning

[Page 48]
IFRC Global Plan 2024 phase. Resource mobilization and advocacy will support REACH at all levels.
Malaria
Malaria remains a deadly threat, killing 600,000 people annually. An estimated two-thirds of malaria deaths are children aged under five.
Yet funding to sustain life-saving interventions continues to drop, placing ever greater importance on community-led work to reduce risks and identify upsurges in case numbers, and to ensure community- and home-based prevention, diagnostic and treatment services.
Member National Societies in malaria-endemic countries are building their capacities in line with new approaches to effectively support national authorities’ country-level strategic plans for malaria control or elimination.
This will require investment to integrate malaria services into ongoing community health programmes and introduce new areas of support, particularly where climate change is affecting the global spread of malaria and other vector-borne diseases.
In 2024, the IFRC will support National Societies in priority countries to scale up their country-level and community-based engagement in malaria prevention and treatment, including through integrated community case management.
The organization will achieve this through existing high-impact partnerships such as the Alliance for 
Malaria Prevention, which is active across Africa, the Americas and Asia Pacific.
The IFRC will support the Chad Red Cross and the 
Togo Red Cross in 2024 to become partners of choice of their respective Ministries of Health in the implementation of upcoming insecticide-treated nets.
CDC Atlanta will support training and OCV campaigns in 2024 and National Societies are integrating the approach into their existing health and preparedness programmes.
Water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH)
Work will continue in 2024 to boost the reach of 
National Societies in water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) services through the IFRC’s One WASH initiative. One WASH is a cross-cutting initiative, including prevention and support for the elimination of cholera, pandemic prevention, climate-change mitigation and poverty reduction in communities.
The IFRC will support National Societies in taking a proactive and anticipatory approach to cholera prevention in 2024, involving the development of detailed cholera contingency plans and capacity assessments. The approach includes oral rehydration therapy preparedness at branch and community level, Branch Outbreak Response Teams, and National Society support for oral cholera vaccine campaigns.
One WASH covers both emergency and developmental WASH. Emergency WASH includes both response and capacity building for preparedness. 
Developmental WASH is carried out in rural and urban settings and includes community water supply, household sanitation and hygiene promotion. 
The IFRC also supports innovation for WASH technology and approaches.
In 2024, the IFRC will continue to communicate the scope and potential for One WASH programming through country visits and online forums, while supporting National Societies to engage with donors and build community-level capacities.
Country-level resource mobilization will be a critical part of ensuring long-term and sustainable WASH programming around the world.
For example, Zimbabwe was the first country to receive WASH programme funding following IFRC’s increased focus on national-level resource mobilization, securing USAID funding in September 2023. 
The Zimbabwe Red Cross will lead implementation of activities in 2024, while the IFRC will support with financial management and technical assistance.
In addition, the development of Early Action 
Protocols for Cholera, currently being piloted in 
Ethiopia and Zambia, may offer a way forward for the approach to funding.
It is hoped that at least five developmental 
WASH projects will be funded and implementing community-level activities by the end of 2024.
Immunization
The IFRC will continue to work closely with National 
Societies to close the immunization gap around the world. Zero-dose and under-immunized children often live in communities that face challenges

[Page 49]
Strategic priorities in accessing health services, for example those in low-income urban areas, remote or hard-to-reach communities, or in fragile or conflict-affected settings.
In 2024, the IFRC will continue to support National 
Society work to achieve and sustain polio eradication in Afghanistan and Pakistan; pursue global and regional routine immunization targets in priority countries, and support the control of vaccine-preventable threats such as measles.
The IFRC will continue support for an oral cholera vaccine roll-out. This will include use of acceptance surveys to increase the impact of messaging in future campaigns.
The IFRC will increase the number of National 
Societies active in routine immunization, aiming for a 50 per cent reduction in the number of zero-dose children in areas where the network is active and contributing to increased immunization coverage.
In the Philippines Red Cross, for example, vaccination of children aged under five will take place using static and mobile teams; with special focus on vulnerable populations in hard-to-reach areas.
SPOTLIGHT  THE REACH INITIATIVE
The REACH (Resilient and Empowered African 
Community Health) initiative is a pivotal part of the 
IFRC’s plans to expand and promote community health work in 2024.
REACH is an ambitious partnership between the 
IFRC and Africa Centre for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC), a continental autonomous health agency of the African Union, to strengthen the community health workforce, and health systems, across the continent.
Community health workers are the bridge between formal health systems and communities in need: building trust, strengthening community and national health systems, and improving communities’ overall health resilience.
There is an urgent need to not only increase their numbers, but also to improve understanding of the critical role they play in supporting communities who currently have no access to formal health services. This may be because they live in remote or conflict-affected areas, or because the available services are simply unaffordable.
These challenges must be addressed to ensure progress toward Sustainable Development Goal 3 to “ensure healthy lives and promote wellbeing for all at all ages” and to guarantee Universal Health Coverage.
At present, only 48 per cent of Africa’s population receive the health services they need. There are fewer than 14 nurses and midwives per 10,000 people in Africa, compared to 43 per 10,000 worldwide.
REACH has the potential to almost double the current community health worker density in 
Africa and is projected to reach 500 million people by 2026.
Project implementation began in South Sudan, 
Nigeria and Burkina Faso in 2023 as pilot projects ahead of continental roll-out. In 2024, the other nine priority countries – Kenya, Somalia, Malawi, 
Togo, Mali, The Gambia, Egypt, Morocco and Central 
African Republic – will receive tailored support to launch their REACH work.
Investment will be needed to support these processes in priority countries over the coming years.
The budget per community health worker is modest – only 1,000 US dollars over five years. The estimated investment needed to scale up to two million community health workers in 55 member states in Africa is two billion US dollars, which will require a strong collaborative effort.
However, analysis by Financing Alliance for Health shows a 10:1 return on investments in community health, driven by increased productivity from a healthier population, rapid response to health emergencies, avoidance of future global health crises and increased employment.

[Page 50]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
MIGRATION AND 
DISPLACEMENT
Supporting people on the move to cope with the risks and challenges of migration while protecting their dignity.
ASSIST AND PROTECT
Provide information and services
Help all along the migration route
Foster integration and livelihoods

[Page 51]
Strategic priorities
143 out of 191
National Societies are to conduct a migration and displacement needs assessment and/or have migration and displacement in their strategic plan by 2025
National Societies are part of the IFRC’s Global 
Migration Programme
4,888 people rescued by the SOS Mediterranée
Humanitarian service points providing assistance
National Societies working on migration
147.4 
CHF network funding requirement
14.8M people to be reached by the network
75%
National Societies xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
ALL 
National Societies operating along main migratory routes have the capacity to access resources to establish 
Humanitarian Service
Points
4M migrants and displaced persons reached with services for assistance and protection per year
ALL 
National Societies operating along main migratory routes have the capacity to access resources to establish 
Humanitarian Service
Points
Top 5 countries for migration work by funding requirement
2025 Targets
1 Türkiye 
3 Egypt
2 Ethiopia
5 Bangladesh
4 Colombia

[Page 52]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
MIGRATION AND DISPLACEMENT
OUR APPROACH
The humanitarian situation of migrants and displaced persons remains alarming. Global totals of refugees and internally displaced persons remain at historic highs, driven by disasters, including related to the climate crisis, new and old conflicts, and other crises.
People on the move across the globe continue to face barriers to accessing essential and often life-saving support. Others face barriers to integration and socio-economic inclusion in societies, including discrimination and marginalization.
The IFRC network is fully committed to scaling up locally led and principled assistance, protection and advocacy for migrants and displaced persons, regardless of their legal status.
We will do this by supporting National Societies to be prepared, to anticipate and to respond rapidly to migration and displacement crises. We will also do this by supporting National Societies to connect across borders and along migration routes, providing a continuity of care and humanitarian support to people on the move.
Together, the network aims to reach at least four million migrants and displaced persons annually with assistance and protection services, and will continue to advocate for the collective responsibility to save lives, and reduce risks, harm and conditions of vulnerability ​for people on the move and host communities alike.
In addition, the IFRC actively supports coordination mechanisms such as the Migration Leadership 
Group, the Global Migration Taskforce, the Movement 
Reference Group on Internal Displacement and the research and analysis of the Global Migration Lab. 
These groups help leverage expertise and insights across the Network, as well as to ensure a collective and coordinated global approach based on local needs and local response.
to be reached by the network
12.1M people
IFRC network funding requirement
147.4M
CHF
IFRC funding requirement 
85.4M

[Page 53]
Strategic priorities
57 COUNTRIES PARTICIPATING IN THE GLOBAL MIGRATION PROGRAMME
OUR PLAN FOR 2024
In 2024, the IFRC will continue to support National 
Societies to address humanitarian needs arising from all kinds of migration and displacement, including by increasing the number and quality of 
Humanitarian Service Points worldwide.
Together, the network will support people on the move along migration routes, in countries of origin, transit, destination and return, in both emergency and non-emergency contexts.
The network’s activities will also expand to give greater focus to climate-related displacement and urban displacement.
Route-based programming and humanitarian service points  The network will continue to provide route-based programming in 2024, to ensure that humanitarian services are available at critical locations along migratory routes, and as people cross countries and regions.
This will include the expansion of the IFRC’s Global 
Route Based Programme on Migration, across 
57 National Societies, with a collective ambition to support 4.7 million people each year, including people on the move and host communities.
National Societies will be supported by the IFRC to establish or scale up Humanitarian Service 
Points that provide a safe environment and essential services to people on the move.
In recent years, there has been a sharp increase in the number of migrants attempting the deadly 
Central Mediterranean route. In 2024, the IFRC will continue to work with SOS Mediterranée and its rescue ship with the objective of reducing human suffering and preventing loss of life at sea. This work is aimed at addressing migrants in the last mile, saving lives and promoting safety, dignity and humanity for all people on the move.
The IFRC has been operating a Humanitarian Service 
Point onboard SOS Mediterranée’s Ocean Viking ship since July 2021. More than 4,900 people have been rescued and supported by IFRC teams specializing in health, psychosocial support and protection. 
In 2024, this lifesaving and last mile humanitarian work will continue, including humanitarian support for migrants upon disembarkation.

[Page 54]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
Addressing climate-related displacement
In 2024, the IFRC will also develop a new global programme addressing the growing crisis of climate-related displacement.
Communities across the world are already suffering the effects of – or are at increasing risk of – climate-related displacement. These impacts are being experienced due to sea level rise, drought, extreme heat, floods and storms. The most vulnerable and the most marginalized people are being hit the hardest.
This new approach to supporting communities at risk will be guided by the needs of National Societies and affected people in countries most vulnerable to the climate crisis.
The programme will be global in scale but will be rooted in localized plans to provide principled humanitarian support in the context of climate-related displacement.
Advocacy and support
In 2024, the IFRC will continue to provide advice and support to National Societies to negotiate policies, agreements or legal provisions related to their auxiliary role in providing support to people on the move. 
This will include support in negotiating agreements concerning Humanitarian Service Points.
Well-coordinated IFRC network advocacy will continue to press for action to ensure the safety of migrants and displaced persons, their access to essential services, and solutions for addressing the increasing risk of climate-induced displacement.
In addition, National Societies will receive continuous support to enhance the scale, quality, effectiveness and relevance of humanitarian support to migrants and displaced persons in emergencies, including preparedness for effective response, anticipatory action, tailored surge expertise and support for protracted displacement.
The IFRC will broaden its research activities in 2024 to better understand the drivers of migration in specific contexts. This will allow the IFRC network and individual National Societies to provide effective support in countries of origin – addressing existing vulnerabilities that can lead to migration – as well as those of transit and destination countries.
For example, in Africa, a regional assessment of migration and displacement contexts is plan- ned for 2024.
This exercise will identify regional trends, give greater insight into the needs of people on the move and the risks they face, and uncover gaps in protection and assistance. This research will then be used to provide tailored support to African National Societies in countries of origin, transit, destination and return.
In the Americas, there were over 21 million people in need of international protection and other persons of concern, 7.1 million Venezuelan migrants and refugees and 6.7 million IDPs in the Americas at the end of 2022.
In Honduras, work will be done to update and implement referral pathways for persons in need of protection. The National Society will also be supported in running awareness-raising campaigns for host populations on the rights of people on the move.
Work will also be done in 2024 to ensure that migration and displacement support services are fully integrated across all IFRC thematic and programmatic contexts. Testing in Colombia of the AccessRC app for digital self-enrolment and integrated assistance, originally developed in the Ukraine crisis response, will also be expanded in 2024 to explore wider use for supporting route-based assistance to migrants across Central America.
The IFRC and National Societies will also work to reduce the risks faced by people crossing the perilous Darién Gap between Colombia and Panama. 
More than 600,000 people are estimated to have made this dangerous crossing between 2021 and 
August 2023.
Work will be done in 2024 to ensure that migration and displacement-support services are fully integrated across all IFRC thematic and programmatic contexts.
These areas will include cash and voucher assistance (including digital ID in migration contexts), protection (including child protection and the prevention of trafficking and sexual- and gender-based violence), health and psychosocial support, shelter and settlements (including urban approaches), livelihoods, community engagement and accountability, 
National Society preparedness and climate.

[Page 55]
Strategic priorities
Panama 2023 © Hermanos Corallo

[Page 56]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
VALUES, POWER 
AND INCLUSION
Building trust within and between communities to address inequalities and underlying causes that can result in violence, discrimination and exclusion.
EMPOWER AND INCLUDE
Build trust with communities
Foster 
PGI in all programming
Roll out education programmes

[Page 57]
Strategic priorities
50% gender parity achieved at all staffing levels of the IFRC by 2028
National Societies provide protection, gender and inclusion education
National Societies provide disaster risk reduction education
National Societies deliver educational programmes in formal settings
140.5M 
CHF network funding requirement
14.8M people to be reached by the network
4M young people
National Societies and the IFRC actively implement the gender and diversity policy and demonstrate tangible progress.
At least
National Societies have integrated the Movement 
Commitments on 
Community
Engagement and 
Accountability into their strategic plans and/or operating procedures.
At least
4M young people reached with skills and values-based humanitarian education, through 
80 National Societies
National Societies have implemented feedback mechanisms
National Societies will have integrated the Movement 
Commitments on 
Community
Engagement and 
Accountability
At least
Top 5 countries for PGI work by funding requirement
2025 Targets
1 Russian Federation
2 Iran
5 Afghanistan
4 Ethiopia
3 Colombia

[Page 58]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
VALUES POWER AND INCLUSION
OUR APPROACH
All over the world, people are put at risk by violence, discrimination and exclusion within and between communities. A growing lack of trust, persistent inequalities, misinformation and poor access to education can also undermine community cohesion.
To improve the life chances of vulnerable and/or marginalized groups, the IFRC network runs programmes and services designed to build skills and empathy, develop critical thinking and promote humanitarian values. We are ensuring that not only are we doing the right thing, but that we are doing the right thing in the right way, through our work in values, power and inclusion.
This includes work to address the lack of access to education, particularly for children during emergencies, protracted crises or following displacement.
The IFRC also focuses on the causes, risks and consequences of violence, particularly gender-based violence, and leads network-wide efforts in preventing sexual abuse and exploitation, and in ensuring safeguarding for all people using IFRC network services.
TOP 10 IFRC NETWORK FUNDING REQUIREMENT FOR VALUES, POWER AND INCLUSION by country compared to their ranking on the Gender Inequality index
Country
IFRC network funding requirement (CHF millions)
Gender Inequality Index ranking
Russian Federation 38.3 
Iran, Islamic Republic of 24.3 
Colombia 5.1 
Ethiopia 3.2 
Afghanistan 3.0 
Kenya 2.1 
Somalia 2.1 
South Sudan 1.9 
El Salvador 1.3 
Bangladesh 1.3 to be reached by the network
13.8M people
IFRC network funding requirement
140.5M
CHF
IFRC funding requirement 
35.8M

[Page 59]
Strategic priorities
OUR PLAN FOR 2024
Humanitarian education
Education has a central role in fostering a culture of resolving differences humanely and peacefully. 
When people lack access to quality education, or when their learning is disrupted by disasters and crises, it can have a dramatic impact on their physical and mental wellbeing, affecting the life prospects of entire generations.
In 2024, the IFRC will build on its existing work in education by mainstreaming modern approaches to developing non-violent skills and promoting peaceful attitudes through its new Red Education programme to be rolled out in the formal sector, working with a minimum of 20 countries selected based on need and demand.
This programme will develop knowledge, values and skills that contribute to people’s personal, social and professional development and allow them to interpret situations from a humanitarian perspective.
In 2024, the IFRC and National Societies will work in partnership with Ministries of Education, teachers, children, adolescents and young adults to enable continuous access to quality education in times of crisis and in times of peace.
The programme will help to create an environment where children, adolescents and young adults are fulfilling their right to access inclusive, quality education, in line with the IFRC Strategic Framework on 
Education 2020–2030.
This framework highlights the work that National 
Societies are already doing to ensure access to and continuity of education that is inclusive, equitable, of high quality, and contributes to protection, safety and wellbeing.
The vast majority of the network’s 191 National 
Societies are active in the provision of education, with 166 delivering programmes in formal settings, and 184 providing services in non-formal settings.
As part of this ongoing non-formal education portfolio, the IFRC will continue its focus in 2024 on 
Limitless, the network’s innovation programme for youth engagement.
Protection, gender and inclusion
In the area of protection, gender and inclusion (PGI), work in 2024 will focus on supporting National 
Society work to implement the IFRC PGI policy. This will be achieved by providing institutional, programmatic and advocacy work relevant to each National 
Society’s context, guided by the PGI Operational 
Framework.
The first priority in 2024 will be to build institutional foundations for PGI in National Society and IFRC offices, primarily through the PGI Organizational 
Assessment Toolkit (integrated with the Capacity 
Building Fund (See Enabling Function 2: National 
Society Development for more information). More work will be enabled through IFRC’s Safeguarding 
Self-Assessment for National Societies.
Safeguarding is such a priority for the IFRC that several departments share responsibility for managing it alongside the PGI team, including the Office of the 
Secretary General and Head of Safeguarding, Office of Internal Audit and Investigations, Legal, Human 
Resources, Risk, senior leadership and programme teams all work on its design and effectiveness.
To support safeguarding across the network in 2024, the IFRC will continue to work with National Societies to develop policies for prevention/response to sexual exploitation and abuse, child safeguarding, anti-harassment and whistleblower protection, and processes for effective screening, training, sensitive feedback mechanisms, investigations and support to survivors.
These activities will build National Societies’ institutional capacity to address issues of violence, discrimination and exclusion, with particular focus on safeguarding.
For example, in 2024, National Societies in the 
Americas, Africa and Asia Pacific regions will be supported to develop policies and strategies on the prevention of sexual abuse and exploitation, and child safeguarding as well as anti-sexual harassment procedures; or to strengthen existing practices such as in Botswana, Ethiopia, Liberia and Nigeria.
Training will be provided on the prevention and response to sexual and gender-based violence. By the end of 2024, at least five National Societies in

[Page 60]
IFRC Global Plan 2024 the Americas will have created standard operating procedures and mechanisms for the support and referral of people affected by such violence.
At the same time, the IFRC will continue to strengthen the capacity to address PGI in emergencies. This second priority will be achieved in 2024 by boosting the overall PGI Rapid Response (Surge) capacity through increasing the number of specialists on the 
PGI roster, with a specific emphasis on new skills in safeguarding and child protection in emergencies.
The IFRC will also ensure that all personnel working in an IFRC-supported operation are able to demonstrate the established core competencies for PGI. 
These efforts will be complemented by work supporting National Societies to address specific types of risks in emergencies and in their long-term programmes.
These risks include – but are not limited to – preventing sexual- and gender-based violence; and boosting child protection and disability inclusion. This priority will also drive the integration of PGI in other sectors and initiatives, including migration, WASH, education, community health and anticipatory action.
The third PGI priority in 2024 is to boost IFRC network advocacy, partnerships and knowledge-sharing. 
This priority will be driven by the re-launched and re-invigorated Global PGI Network including at least 
700 focal points across the IFRC network.
This is designed to strengthen collaboration and coordination on PGI, and to harmonize technical approaches to challenging themes while boosting the focus on gender and social equality outcomes. 
This will be facilitated by improving knowledge sharing and data management, monitoring, reviews and evaluations related to PGI.
Another target for PGI work in 2024 is the development of a new five-year global programme called 
Red Links. This initiative will equip Red Cross and 
Red Crescent staff and volunteers across the world with the tools and knowledge to ensure a new global standard for creating and using referral pathways, providing quality and dignified support to people affected by violence, exploitation, abuse or neglect.
Community engagement and accountability
The IFRC will continue to implement its 2023–2025 
Community Engagement and Accountability (CEA) strategy which contributes to Strategy 2030’s transformational aim to ‘ensure trust and accountability’.
The goal is also about how community engagement approaches will strengthen the relevance, impact and quality of Red Cross and Red Crescent efforts, programmes, operations and work to empower communities to be more active and able to participate in leading and implementing their own changes and improvements, based on their priorities and decisions.
There are three strategic priorities to achieve this goal:
1. Improve quality, consistency and scale – in order to improve the quality, consistency and scale of community engagement and accountability by embedding the Movement-wide 
Commitments within organizational ways of working
2. Leverage data and evidence for decision making – by systematically tracking, analyzing and using community data to inform decisionmaking, and gathering more evidence to demonstrate the impact of community engagement on programme and operational quality and effectiveness, and on peoples’ trust in the 
IFRC network.
3. Strengthen coordination and advocacy – between Movement members and with external partners, to improve understanding, support and consistency, reduce duplication, and identify opportunities for collaboration.
In 2024, the IFRC will continue to call for an urgent shift of leadership and decision-making to the most local level – placing communities at the very centre of change to ensure that all Red Cross and Red 
Crescent programming is truly effective, inclusive and sustainable.
For example, National Societies in the Africa region will be supported in 2024 to conduct CEA self-assessments. These will include the Force Field 
Analysis, a tool that helps National Societies to identify opportunities and obstacles regarding the integration of CEA in their contexts. This can inform action plans on what topics to advocate for and how to strengthen organizational support for CEA.

[Page 61]
Strategic priorities
Nepal 2023 © Shriluna Shrestha / 
IFRC Nepal

[Page 63]
Enabling functions
STRATEGIC AND OPERATIONAL 
COORDINATION
OUR APPROACH
The IFRC has a statutory mandate to coordinate and a constitutional mandate to ‘organize, coordinate and direct international relief actions in accordance with the ‘Principles and Rules for Red Cross and Red 
Crescent humanitarian Assistance’, acting through or in agreement with the National Society.
Good strategic coordination leads to good operational coordination, particularly during an emergency response where timely, consistent and coherent strategies are possible through enhanced coordination platforms.
This aids routine communication and coordination, as well as supporting allocation of tasks; delineation of responsibilities and building conditions of risk sharing with joint mitigation efforts.
It also allows the IFRC network to move faster and reach further by eliminating duplication and avoiding gaps – saving lives and also saving resources.
Membership Coordination relates specifically to coordination of the IFRC and the 191 member National Societies – bringing the membership together in direction and action.
Movement Cooperation follows the Statutes and policies, strategies and decisions of the International 
Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, including the Seville Agreement 2.0 and the processes to 
Strengthen 
Movement 
Coordination and 
Cooperation (SMCC). It includes all components of the Movement – National Societies, the IFRC and the 
ICRC, and encourages complementarity.
Cooperation with external actors is ensured through regular dialogue at country, regional and global levels, with government authorities, the diplomatic community, and the humanitarian and private sectors.
OUR PLAN FOR 2024
During the course of the year, the IFRC will continue to serve National Societies by acting as a permanent body for liaison, coordination and study among them, providing assistance, and coordinating their participation in activities that safeguard public health and promote social welfare and a culture of non-violence and peace.
Specifically, tasks in 2024 will include implementing the New Way of Working (see Spotlight for more information), fostering institutional coherence, integrating the network’s 30 global, regional and National Society-led Reference Centres, exploring avenues for an updated policy on international cooperation, and furthering the development and mainstreaming of the SMCC initiative.
Transforming coordination
Our focus for 2024 continues to be in enhancing 
Membership and Movement coordination mechanisms to improve efficiency and effectiveness in local and international humanitarian action, and to encourage greater trust and accountability.
To achieve this, the IFRC must ensure that its institutional systems are agile enough to ensure quality operations and effective coordination. The organization will revise and renew its Emergency Response 
Framework in 2024 to increase agility, and a framework for international cooperation will also be developed during the year.
For Membership coordination, the priority for 
2024 will be to enable, develop and support the global mainstreaming of the New Way of Working following its successful pilot phase in 2022 and 2023.
In 2024, the IFRC will become a more effective platform for international emergency operations, collective representation of the IFRC membership, policy discussions, and National Society development and capacity strengthening.

[Page 64]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
Processes will be streamlined and made more inclusive to improve the functioning of the network – a system of independent interrelated parts, connected to national government through each 
National Society’s auxiliary role, and with a network of local branches in more than 191 countries.
The goal is for this global IFRC to be viewed as one entity: truly networked and acting as one, applying principles of humanitarian action, with one standard of accountability and a single action plan.
Work will also be done to ensure the global network is future-fit, with the value of its local and global work fully recognized. National Societies will be supported to be seen as trusted partners of choice who deliver on their humanitarian mandate with efficiency and effectiveness.
In 2024, the priority for Movement coordination is to support operations for optimal humanitarian delivery by ensuring the implementation of SMCC tools and continuous monitoring of the Seville 2.0 
Agreement in operations. Another priority will be to prepare a model for facilitating and monitoring of 
Movement coordination.
Working as a distributed network
The goal for 2024 is to achieve a mindset shift that significantly changes how the IFRC operates as a distributed network, as recommended by IFRC’s 
Strategy 2030, by drawing on the capacity and expertise of the IFRC network Reference Centres. 
A standard model will be developed for coordination, alignment and accountability to encourage behavioural and cultural change between and within the reference centres and the IFRC network.
This will include a framework for engagement to improve cooperation on topics of common interest and to define the role of reference centres in emergencies and global programmes, and as champions of knowledge management and advocacy.
This will require leaders setting an example through collaborative behaviour, fostering continuous learning and shared accountability, and maintaining a balanced power dynamic.
This transformative journey will be powered by knowledge gained from National Societies and the 
IFRC Secretariat’s own experiences.
Coordinating global services and supply chain management
In 2024, the IFRC will optimize its global services and supply chain management to provide greater service to National Societies, with their full participation, in support of cost efficiency gains and greater localization. This will include exploring the establishment of new logistics hubs in selected locations, for a global network of inter-connected hubs, supported by existing competencies of National Societies in service to emergency operations and for consolidation of global domestic demand and supply of the member National Societies.
This work is led by the Global Humanitarian Services and Supply Chain Management Department – focused on the procurement and delivery of appropriate relief items at the places and time they are needed, and the management of warehousing and fleet services. 
The IFRC’s Global Service Centre in Budapest (Hungary) is centre is a hub for the coordination of 
IT Support services, procurement and supply chain management, human resources, surge training and other operational services, catering to the global needs of IFRC.
Streamlining and digitalization of global services and supply chain management has been continuing through the Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) initiative, which is focusing on improving efficiency of the IFRC Secretariat systems and procedures. As a very important and innovative direction, in 2024 we will continue to explore and develop a suite of digital tools for the member National Societies including an E.Shop (marketplace) and related stock management, transportation and tender management processes for the whole network.
At the same time, the IFRC’s New Fleet Business 
Model will seek out new partnerships that will allow for greater efficiencies and improve coordination across the network, with IFRC progressively providing cost efficient sourcing and leasing solutions for the domestic fleet of all member National Societies.
Also in 2024, the IFRC will explore possibilities on inte- grating the inventory and Framework Agreements of 
National Societies and the ICRC into one dynamically managed package available to all.

[Page 65]
Enabling functions
SPOTLIGHT  THE WAY OF WORKING
In 2024, the IFRC will reaffirm its commitment to placing National Societies at the heart of all humanitarian efforts through the global mainstreaming of the New Way of Working.
This initiative is an improved mechanism for membership cooperation at country level, encouraging a mindset change across the network, and boosting localization through an increased focus on individual National Societies and their priorities. A pilot scheme ran in 14 countries between 2022 and 2023, and of 2024 it will be implemented across the system based on the learnings from the pilot phase.
It centres the strategic and operational priorities of the National Society managing a disaster or crisis, and achieve stronger and more effective membership coordination through alignment with the 
National Society’s strategic plan.
In effect, it brings the full power of the global network together, and places it at the disposal of the 
National Society affected by a crisis in its country.
This New Way of Working – to be called “The Way of Working” after January 2024 – also prioritizes effective coordination and seeks to optimize the power of working as one IFRC by sharing resources, knowledge and common standards to achieve greater impact.
It will encourage unity and greater coherence across a very diverse group of independent organizations and will also optimize the reporting process.
In 2024 the IFRC will monitor the network-wide implementation of this initiative, building on the successes of the pilot scheme and incorporating the lessons learned, and ensuring its alignment with the 
Unified Planning process.
The model will be reinforced through the development of Joint Implementation and Resource 
Mobilization modalities in the 14 pilot countries, expanding the initiative to all other countries and 
IFRC offices.
In addition, the ownership of the Way of Working will move from headquarter to regional level, allowing for more closely tailored support to National 
Societies.
This work will allow the IFRC to become an even more effective platform for international coordination of emergency operations, collective representation of the IFRC membership, policy discussions, and National Society development and capacity strengthening.
It will encourage the IFRC to perform as one entity, with all internal components truly networked and striving for a common goal: providing effective, accountable and principled local humanitarian action, backed by well-coordinated international support whenever and wherever it is needed.

[Page 66]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
NATIONAL SOCIETY DEVELOPMENT
OUR APPROACH
The IFRC’s commitment to localization is demonstrated by its work in National Society development.
The network has, from its inception, understood that locally led organizations are best placed to understand a context, its stressors and its opportunities, and be able to anticipate and respond to emerging and fast-changing local and global needs.
National Societies need continued investment and development to evolve their services, remain future-fit, and carry out their mandates in line with humanitarian principles and values. They are supported to carry out their rights and duties as members of the IFRC network, including actions to strengthen integrity and compliance.
The IFRC also works to ensure the engagement, wellbeing and safety of Red Cross and Red Crescent volunteers, inspire youth and through co-creation, bring their ideas and solutions to fruition, encouraging diversity in volunteer leadership across the network.
OUR PLAN FOR 2024
Localization: stronger National Societies
In 2024, the IFRC will focus on fostering sustainable and accountable organizations that provide essential services through volunteers and staff to address needs, reduce vulnerabilities and bolster resilience in evolving environments.
National Societies, as local actors, should not only support at-risk communities but also collaborate effectively with their national authorities through their auxiliary role.
In Africa, for example, the IFRC, in collaboration with the Netherlands Red Cross and technical partners such as the Norwegian Red Cross and Swiss Red 
Cross, has formed a Localization Alliance. The primary focus is on enhancing financial sustainability, by encouraging a transition from traditional donor funding to investment and business development strategies.
Several countries, including Zambia, Uganda, 
South Sudan, Central African Republic, Mali, 
Sudan and Ethiopia, have benefited from branch and strategic leadership support, while Liberia, 
Nigeria and Malawi are receiving assistance in finance development, and private and corporate resource mobilization.
The consortium is working with the Kenya Red 
Cross Society to create a knowledge hub for 
African National Societies and planning to establish a renewed fund for the next three years to further enhance localization support across the continent.
Organizational Capacity Assessment
The revised Organizational Capacity Assessment (OCA) will continue being rolled out in 2024, and the analysis of the feedback received will serve to continuously improve the system before being presented at the 2024 IFRC General Assembly.
The new third party IFRC Certification will be fully developed in 2024 based on due diligence standards and ensuring IFRC minimum standards based on consultations with the membership and donors.
During the first part of the year, an IFRC-wide consultation will take place to collect input and advice from the IFRC membership. The new IFRC Certification will be submitted to the 2024 IFRC General Assembly for approval.
The Honduras Red Cross conducted its first OCAC assessment in 2013, not meeting the requirements to qualify for the next OCAC phase. The National 
Society then used those results to guide its development process, gradually strengthening its capacity. 
When conducting the OCAC for the second time in 
2019, and following some additional corrective measures, it successfully met all OCAC standards. The 
OCAC peer review concluded that “The Honduran 
Red Cross is a strong National Society that delivers relevant, high-quality programmes and services. Its constant efforts to improve its performance and ensure transparency and accountability make it the partner of choice in Honduras”.

[Page 67]
Enabling functions
Almost ten years after starting its first OCAC assessment, and using this process to guide its development efforts, the Honduras Red Cross became the fifth National Society to be OCAC  certified by the IFRC Governing Board. The Argentine 
Red Cross became OCAC certified by the IFRC’s 
Governing Board in October 2023.
National Societies’ Auxiliary Role
In 2024, a significant effort will be directed towards bolstering National Societies’ auxiliary role in legal frameworks, encompassing their constitutive laws and sector-specific instruments such as disaster-risk management, health, migration and tax laws.
This initiative involves aiding National Societies in advocacy, dissemination and communication with authorities to enhance understanding and recognition of their auxiliary role, the Fundamental 
Principles, and collaborative network principles and rules.
In 2024, all National Societies are expected to review and potentially revise their Statutes to align with the minimum standards established in the 2018 
Guidance for National Society Statutes.
To facilitate this process, National Societies can access support from a pool of Movement specialists who were trained for this purpose in 2023.
Additionally, the IFRC will establish a community of practice to foster the sharing of best practices, access to model Statutes, and collaborative efforts aimed at achieving 100 per cent compliance with aligned Statutes by the end of 2024.
The new IFRC Policy Starter Kit finalized in 2023 will be rolled out to all National Societies in 2024, and ways to effectively support policy development will be established to allow both IFRC and National 
Society peer-to-peer support in this area.
Volunteering: the heart of local action
The IFRC’s Strategy 2030 places volunteering and civic mobilization at the core of building more inclusive societies. The evolving nature of community and volunteering, especially empowered by digital technology, is acknowledged in the 2022 IFRC 
Volunteer Policy.
Volunteering is both a means and an end, fostering inclusive, healthy and vibrant societies. It shapes local attitudes, channels compassion into action and instils civic responsibility, empowering individuals as agents of positive change.
Malawi 2023 © Victor Lacken / IFRC

[Page 68]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
In 2024, the IFRC plans to underline the centrality of volunteers as drivers of engaged and inclusive societies, and of National Societies as empowered and effective local actors.
The organization will support National Societies in innovative volunteer engagement, management and development, ensuring retention, wellbeing, diversity and inclusion. Volunteering will be central to their programmes and operations, and institutional development, aligned with the localization agenda.
The IFRC will also equip volunteers to prepare communities for emergencies and prevention, whilst also ensuring that during emergencies, volunteers are kept safe and managed properly, offering training to keep volunteers motivated, engaged and safe.
Knowledge management
In 2024 and beyond, the IFRC will enhance knowledge management, enabling staff and volunteers to make informed decisions. This support to National 
Societies will focus on three interconnected areas:
1. Streamline knowledge discovery: Gathering knowledge resources and improving access through advanced intranet, extranet and AI- assisted tools.
2. Foster peer-to-peer knowledge sharing: 
Revitalizing the Community of Practice service with a digital platform for community-building and collaboration.
3. Field-test knowledge services: Ensuring that knowledge services align with the needs of 
National Societies, using feedback to refine valuable knowledge development strategies for the IFRC network.
Financial sustainability
In 2024, financial sustainability is a top priority for 
National Societies aiming to reduce reliance on external donors and partners and ensure their independence. Building on the success of the Financial 
Development Competency Network and the launch of Resource Mobilization Community of Practice in 2023, IFRC will continue to provide peer-topeer support.
The focus in 2024 will also extend to equipping 
National Societies’ leadership with accessible evidence-based decision-making tools, offering practical solutions to National Societies and IFRC delegations.
The IFRC will finalize revised guidance for National 
Society Strategic Planning aligning it to Strategy 
2030, including a stronger focus on trend analysis and risk management, and providing National 
Societies access to expertise from their peers during the strategic planning process.
The IFRC will continue to lead by example in the area of financial sustainability, including through its measures to strengthen and diversify services such as the Disaster Response Emergency Fund (DREF).
DREF Insurance is an innovative mechanism developed by the IFRC in partnership with Aon and the 
Centre for Disaster Protection, which leverages the power of the private sector to make stretched government donor contributions go further.
Instead of providing money to fund disaster responses as a traditional grant, donors can pay the insurance premium. This stretches the value of their contributions and transfers the risk to the private sector if DREF funding requests relating to natural hazards exceed available resources.
Other innovations in financial sustainability include partnerships such as the ECHO Programmatic 
Partnership (see Spotlight in Strategic Priority 2: 
Disasters and crises for more information.)

[Page 69]
Enabling functions
SPOTLIGHT POOLED FUNDS FOR NSD
The Capacity Building Fund (CBF), with an annual funding target of 20 million Swiss francs by 2026, has seven key development priorities: integrity, transparency and accountability; financial sustainability; volunteering development; systems development and digital transformation; branch development; youth engagement and development; and protection, gender and inclusion. By end 2023, CBF will have disbursed nine million Swiss francs to 115 
National Societies. Nearly 50 National Societies will continue previously funded development initiatives in 2024 while new funding requests will be continuously processed.
The National Society Investment Alliance (NSIA), in collaboration with the ICRC, is set to foster sustainable development in approximately 
80 National Societies operating in fragile contexts, with the goal of reaching an annual funding target of 15 million Swiss francs by 2026. With 65 projects funded since 2019 for a total investment of 13.7 million Swiss francs, 49 projects will start, continue or conclude in 2024. NSIA will launch its sixth annual call for proposals in 2024.
Furthermore, the Empress Shôken Fund (ESF), co-managed in partnership with the ICRC, will disburse up to 0.5 million Swiss francs in its 103rd annual grant cycle. Yearly, this fund supports up to 20 innovative projects proposed by National 
Societies. It operates as an endowment fund, where the interest generated from capital investments is distributed to National Societies in the form of grants. 
This distinctive model renders it self-sustaining and establishes a predictable funding cycle.
The synergy of these funding mechanisms amplifies the impact of each individual contribution. Whether it is advancing digital transformation, enhancing financial sustainability or empowering youth and volunteers, these investments fortify the capacity of 
National Societies for localized action. 
The Ecuadorean Red Cross utilized CBF investment to transform their medical centres and expand medical services and branch services to underserved communities.
CBF investment was employed by the Burundi 
Red Cross to train members of national and provincial committees, and to establish volunteer coaching and learning centres. This resulted in a notable 10 per cent increase in branches meeting the “well-functioning” standard, a testament to the positive influence of CBF support.
The Ukrainian Red Cross Society, as one of the first recipients of NSIA accelerator funding, focused on building a digital funding infrastructure to enhance resource mobilization. This enabled the 
URCS to efficiently handle increased donations during the conflict.
ESF grant will empower the Dominica Red Cross 
Society to address climate change by supporting the introduction of farming techniques and training 15 farmers as Agri First Responders in their community.

[Page 70]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
HUMANITARIAN DIPLOMACY
OUR APPROACH
Humanitarian diplomacy is about “persuading decision makers and opinion leaders to act, at all times, in the interests of vulnerable people, and with full respect for fundamental humanitarian principles”. (IFRC Humanitarian Diplomacy Policy, 2009). For 
IFRC and National Societies, this “is not a choice, but a responsibility”.
The IFRC engages directly to influence multilateral forums, as well as supporting National Society humanitarian diplomacy at local, national and regional levels, and builds humanitarian diplomacy capacities through training and the provision of tools, messaging and analysis and more.
Engagement takes place at multiple levels and in a variety of ways, including at the operational level to ensure access to people at risk, and to advocate for humanitarian needs to be addressed.
For National Societies, humanitarian diplomacy is a vital part of the auxiliary role they play to their governments in the humanitarian arena. National 
Societies, often with IFRC support, regularly seek to influence country-level laws, policies and practices, such as through the work of IFRC’s Disaster Law.
Humanitarian diplomacy – based on country-level needs in communities around the world – also drives IFRC engagement with governments and other partners (donors, humanitarian and development actors etc) at regional and global levels.
The IFRC engages in multilateral processes and seeks to bring the voices and perspectives of 
National Societies into those processes such as the 34th International Conference of the Red 
Cross and Red Crescent, which will take place in 
October 2024, in the company of States Party to the 
Geneva Conventions. The IFRC also engages with the United Nations General Assembly in New York, the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) annual Conference of Parties (COP), the 
Global Refugee Forum and much more.
OUR PLAN FOR 2024
The IFRC will continue to bring the concerns and needs of local communities to the highest levels of international decision-making in 2024. We intend to invest in and build capacities of National Societies to support engagement and advocacy on the issues of concern to them. We will also work to improve our systems so that together as a network we have the knowledge, analysis, tools, strategic approach and access to influence decision makers to act in accordance with the needs and interests of people at risk around the world.
Red Cross and Red Crescent collective action will be strengthened throughout the year by tools and training to build National Society skills in humanitarian diplomacy. This includes support to develop national government engagement strategies, development of thematic communities of practice around climate change, disaster law and displacement, development of policy briefs, reports, key messages and other engagement tools. In 2023 the IFRC launched a Climate Champions Programme, which will expand in 2024 to include more National 
Societies and increase support for country-level climate-related HD strategies. IFRC will also support a SIDS Disaster Law Network established by National 
Societies in 2023 to allow joint advocacy with public authorities on common challenges in tackling disaster and climate issues through law and policy.
A new Framework for Humanitarian Diplomacy in Emergencies will be developed in 2024, including systems for its implementation and to ensure surge capacities, and improved data collection and analysis, to facilitate HD in support of affected communities in fragile and complex settings.
At the same time, work will continue to build 
National Societies’ relationships with key government ministries in their role as auxiliary to national authorities in the humanitarian field. This will facilitate country-level humanitarian diplomacy in climate, disaster-risk management, health and migration, among other IFRC network priorities.

[Page 71]
Enabling functions
Throughout 2024, the IFRC will work to ensure that texts in global, regional and national resolutions, outcomes documents, plans and strategies recognize the importance of local leadership and action, including, where appropriate, the critical role of 
National Societies.
In addition, the IFRC will convene communities of practice with National Societies on relevant themes such as auxiliary roles, climate change and disaster-risk reduction, migration and displacement, community health, and the importance of localization. These groups will identify and analyze needs and challenges, and develop tools to support coherent humanitarian diplomacy at local, national, regional and global levels.
Local impact, global influence
In 2024, the IFRC will continue to boost the ambitions and messaging of National Societies through tailored support in three priority areas of global influencing. These are referred to as “the three Ps”:
 • public behaviour change (e.g., persuading communities to accept immunization) • policy change (e.g., persuading donors to channel more funds to local humanitarian capacity needs, persuading authorities to adopt and implement strong disaster and emergency-related laws), and • profile building (e.g., ensuring that partners understand and value both the humanitarian and development activities of the IFRC network).
All IFRC influencing work – whether a global campaign, a national policy ask, or support to local communications and advocacy colleagues – takes place within these three priority areas.
In 2024, the IFRC will continue work with National 
Societies, governments and regional disaster-risk management organizations to strengthen disaster governance, through the development and implementation of disaster- and emergency-related laws, policies and plans. IFRC’s works will include technical support, capacity building, the development of tools, models and guidelines, advocacy, research and promoting the sharing of experiences and best practices between countries. Notably, at global level, the IFRC will promote the adoption and implementation by States of the recommendations provided in the new Guidelines on Disaster Risk 
Governance: Strengthening Laws, Policies and Plans for Comprehensive Disaster Risk Management, and support the UNGA Working Group on the Draft 
Articles for the Protection of Persons in the Event of Disasters, and maintains and expands its engagement with international discussions regarding a new disaster convention.
Country-level disaster law activities
The IFRC is supporting the Ecuador Red Cross to revise how their auxiliary role is recognized in sectoral laws, policy plans and agreements, enabling it to conduct its operations more efficiently and effectively. In 2024, IFRC will support the National Society to develop an advocacy strategy and roadmap focusing on promoting a Red Cross constitutive law and strengthened legislative advocacy capacities.
In Fiji, the IFRC is supporting the Fiji Red Cross’ work with the government, national and international disaster- and climate-related stakeholders to review and integrate climate and disaster-risk management laws for a stronger disaster-risk governance framework.
In South Sudan, with the Sudan Red Cross, the IFRC is supporting the government with extensive development of the national disaster-risk management legislation which will mandate the establishment of a comprehensive multi-hazard early warning system and national DRM fund.
In Tajikistan, IFRC is supporting the Red Crescent 
Society of Tajikistan and the government to draft new legal instruments and establish an intergovernmental disaster-risk management working group to guide and facilitate the development and implementation processes of these instruments. 
Other global products, such as IFRC’s flagship biennial World Disasters Report, communications campaigns such as “Climate Changed Me” and information resources such as the IFRC Policy Workspace and IFRC Newswire, allow strong key messages and critical humanitarian diplomacy information to be shared across the network. This approach – “one message, many messengers” – ensures both coherence and impact.
Also in 2024, country-level humanitarian diplomacy will be boosted by the addition of more HD focal points across the five Regions to work alongside the policy teams in the New York Delegation, Red Cross

[Page 72]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
Fiji 2020 © Ponipate / IFRC

[Page 73]
Enabling functions
EU Office, the African Union Delegation and the policy unit at IFRC Headquarters. This is aligned with the commitments made in the Agenda for Renewal.
The IFRC will work to support National Society and network ambitions at major intergovernmental events such as the UNFCCC Conferences of the 
Parties (COPs) of the UN Framework on Climate 
Change and annual sessions of the UN General 
Assembly, as well as in humanitarian forums, such as the Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC) and the Grand Bargain.
This also includes high-level internal events such as the IFRC General Assembly, the Council of Delegates, and the International Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent, all of which will take place in 
October 2024. (See Spotlight for more information on the International Conference.)
All humanitarian diplomacy activities and outreach will be reinforced through strategic communications work in 2024.
A new Global Communications and Advocacy 
Strategy will be produced in support of the ambitions and commitments of the Agenda for Renewal. 
The strategy will consider the following communications objectives:
 •
Support the achievement of operational objectives around the five Strategic Priorities and the 
Enabling Functions.
 •
Increase awareness and understanding of the 
IFRC globally and locally.
 •
Inspire greater ambition and action.
 •
Mobilize action among partners and supporters.
 •
Build lasting support and trust.
In 2024, the IFRC will use audience-focused methodology around “cause communications” to be the leading voice on humanitarian issues and solutions. 
Communications will also inspire people to care by creating an emotional connection between individuals and the global challenges that affect us all, and will work to mobilize action through partnerships and by providing avenues for change.
While IFRC humanitarian diplomacy has many objectives, one important goal is to create an environment that fosters greater support for communities in need, including resources for Red Cross and Red 
Crescent work.
To this end, the IFRC will work to improve how it communicates with donors and partners in 2024. 
This will include work to strengthen donor visibility by developing Guidelines for IFRC Donor 
Communications, with the focus on acknowledging and thanking donors and partners for their invalu- able contributions.
The 34th International Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent
The highest level of Red Cross and Red Crescent humanitarian diplomacy takes place in October 
2024, with the 34th International Conference.
This event takes place every four years and draws the entire International Red Cross and Red Crescent 
Movement together with the States Party to the 
Geneva Conventions to discuss the world’s humanitarian challenges and strategize a collective response.
The 2024 conference has three main pillars of discussion and negotiation, each one equally important in the context of ever-growing humanitarian challenges.
The first is “Building a global culture of respect for 
International Humanitarian Law”. Two Resolutions will be introduced for decision – one reaffirming the essential principles of IHL, and the other calling for the protection of civilians against risks resulting from the increasing digitalization of armed conflicts.
The second is “Standing by our Fundamental 
Principles in responding to humanitarian needs and risks”, and will reaffirm the importance of humanity, impartiality, neutrality and independence as vital enablers of effective humanitarian action. An updated resolution on Disaster Law will be introduced for decision, including a new consolidated (but non-binding) checklist covering all phases of disaster-risk management.
The third pillar promotes the importance of localization, and is titled “Enable sustainable, locally led action”. This theme highlights the benefits of increased international and domestic investment in local leadership, ownership and action related to humanitarian activities, resilience and peacebuilding. A Resolution will be proposed for adoption on enabling sustainable, locally led action by National 
Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies.

[Page 74]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
ACCOUNTABILITY AND AGILITY
OUR APPROACH
The events of recent years have shown that humanitarian organizations must be able to move quickly and adapt their approaches to meet changing humanitarian needs.
To this end, the IFRC has embraced a culture of systematic risk management for more agile preventive and mitigation measures, while ensuring transparent accountability within the IFRC to better respond to communities, partners and donors.
At the same time, IFRC systems and processes have been overhauled to allow the network to respond more rapidly while maintaining comprehensive checks and balances.
The IFRC network is fully committed to operating with integrity in accordance with the Fundamental 
Principles of the Red Cross and Red Crescent, and in line with all applicable statutory texts, rules, policies and procedures.
Integrity and accountability build trust. Trust gives the IFRC network access to communities and to partnerships, as well as encouraging a productive and healthy volunteer and staff base.
OUR PLAN FOR 2024
In 2024, work will continue across the IFRC to ensure improved accountability, better integration and streamlining of IFRC systems and processes and a mindset change towards a culture of risk management.
The network will also receive continuous support for business development and improvement for 
National Societies, particularly in the areas of audit and investigation, financial sustainability, planning and reporting, and digital transformation.
Work will also be done to instil a business continuity mindset across the IFRC network, with National 
Societies supported to develop and align their own plans.
These efforts will be powered by the continued implementation of the Enterprise Resource 
Planning (ERP) project across the global IFRC. This project not only improves accountability but breaks down silos within the organization, resulting in a more integrated and harmonious way of working.
The ERP, culminating in the “Ready” system, will manage core business processes (such as project management, finance, human resources, logistics, partnerships and resource development, planning, monitoring, evaluation and reporting, among others) in a unified manner. It allows digital processes to become integrated, automated, useful, agile and accountable for everyone at IFRC. It will be used in 
2024 to enhance organizational change management to transform and improve the way we work daily with our systems.
In the area of Global Humanitarian Services and 
Supply Chain Management, work will take place in 2024 to improve accountability by streamlining existing IFRC network processes. This will include substantial revision of current Procurement 
Management.
Digital transformation
Work to accelerate the digital transformation of the network will continue in 2024, in line with IFRC’s ambition to “level up” the 80 least digitally mature and resourced National Societies by 2025. This work is being managed and funded through the Digital 
Transformation Impact Platform. 
These changes are not only streamlining processes across the organization, but also involve a high degree of modernization that will keep the IFRC and National Societies future-fit and more ready to respond quickly to opportunities or new challenges.
Risk management
In the area of risk management, the IFRC will continue to focus on strengthening IFRC and National 
Society capacities to enhance joint accountability

[Page 75]
Enabling functions and build greater trust with donors, partners and communities in the long term.
The IFRC will continue to promote a culture of risk management through initiatives such as global, regional, national and local awareness-raising campaigns, the development of a global training programme, and Circles of Collaboration with National 
Societies. In support of this, dedicated risk managers will continue to be required at regional level and within major programmes and operations throughout 2024, including for the ECHO Programmatic 
Partnership and ERP programmes.
The IFRC will continue the implementation of its Risk 
Management Policy and work towards implementing Federation-wide risk registers and a unified risk management approach in alignment with the unified plans in each country. Through its Risk Management 
Circles of Collaboration, the IFRC will make available support for at least 15 National Societies in all regions to create a risk management policy or framework in 2024.
Focus in 2024 will also be on an overall internal control framework for the IFRC, including a reassessment of current business processes.
This will build on the success of the ForeSEE project, a COVID-19 initiative that eliminated bottlenecks and made IFRC systems more agile and responsive.
In 2024, in close collaboration with the operation teams and delegations, the ForeSEE process will continue to further enhance IFRC’s Global Finance, 
Human Resources and Supply Chain Management systems, improving effectiveness and efficiency, and facilitating timely humanitarian operations. To achieve this objective, one would need to take a holistic approach and look at the significant IFRC processes and make some significant changes. The ambition is that the IFRC leads the sector, having best-in-class systems and processes to provide even greater efficiency while achieving a better balance between controls and agility.
The implementation of the Federation-wide 
Integrity Policy in 2024 will strengthen integrity capacities across the entire network. Support will be given to National Societies to set up an integrity line and the supporting whistleblower protection systems, with a target of 70 National Societies achieving this by 2025.
Internal audit and investigations
The IFRC’s focus in 2024 will be on growing country-level capacities through targeted National 
Society development in audit and investigations. It is hoped that one million Swiss francs will be invested in this work during 2024.
The IFRC’s investigations team was fully regionalized in 2022, and focus will now move to building country-level capacities.
To this end, in 2024, the IFRC will continue to support the professional development of National 
Society staff by providing training and guidance, increasing the number of professionally qualified personnel at country level. The IFRC will build on 2023’s integrity capacity-building activities that included 
Afghanistan, Panama, Haiti, Niger and National 
Societies affected by the Ukraine conflict. In particular, an emphasis will be placed on building robust integrity systems in National Societies, delivering global programmes and large-scale emergencies.
Donor and partner assurance work will continue in 2024 through IFRC briefings, which are given to 
Permanent Missions and other interested parties every quarter.
Safeguarding
The IFRC is committed to preventing and responding to sexual exploitation and abuse (SEA), safeguarding children, and creating a safe environment for staff that is free of harassment and any form of discrimination. In 2024, safeguarding will continue to be an important part of the IFRC’s commitment to ‘do no harm’ and Strategy 2030 states that the organization “will deepen our efforts to prevent, identify and respond to instances and allegations of behaviour that are contrary to our humanitarian principles and values”. This is achieved by making sure that 
Red Cross and Red Crescent staff, volunteers, programmes and communications do no harm to children and adults, and that these people are not exposed to abuse or exploitation. Humanitarian workers hold enormous power, which can increase the risk of exploitation and abuse. The IFRC also looks at sexual harassment, given the increasing recognition that sexual exploitation and abuse and sexual harassment have common structural roots in inequality and gender discrimination which are, fundamentally, about abuse of power.

[Page 76]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
The IFRC actively seeks to minimize any adverse consequences of our programming and presence. The primary aim is to ensure that safeguarding is actively embedded within organizational systems to assure safe recruitment, safe programming, safe partnerships, and to ensure that our actions and footprint match our commitments and mandate. 
The IFRC is committed to taking all reasonable steps to prevent harm from occurring; listening to those who are affected through inclusive complaint mechanisms; providing rapid, survivor-centred response when harm or allegations of harm occur; and learning from every case.
Safeguarding is a cross-cutting issue that requires an integrated cross-sectoral approach. As a result, several IFRC departments share responsibility for managing it – the Office of Internal Audit and 
Investigations, Legal, Human Resources, Risk, senior leadership and programme teams all have a stake in its design and are accountable for its effectiveness. The Head of Safeguarding will continue in 
2024 to strengthen coordination and application of safeguarding policies, systems and commitments. 
This role also provides survivor-centred services as required and strengthen management and governance knowledge. The IFRC has an Integrity Line system for receiving allegations and complaints. The 
Head of Safeguarding will continue to proactively work to create a safe and inclusive environment at the IFRC; lead the multidisciplinary work needed for information sharing, training, HR and resourcing; the development of frameworks and reporting mechanisms, and other cross-network methods of ensuring the safety of all people who use IFRC services and work to help deliver them.
Legal
In 2024, the IFRC’s Legal department will continue to support all areas of Red Cross and Red 
Crescent work. Priorities for the year include work to strengthen compliance at all levels of the organization, from headquarters to country level, through a number of initiatives, listed below:
An IFRC sanctions management policy will be finalized and implemented in 2024, with the roll-out of a compliance screening software to check staff, suppliers, service providers and partners against relevant sanction lists. This will be coupled with training provided throughout the year. The strengthening of this framework and systems will enhance risk management and due diligence, and provide greater assurance to donors and partners that high standards are being met across the IFRC operations.
A full Constitutional Review of the IFRC has been under way for some time and will culminate in proposals being submitted to the IFRC’s 2024 
General Assembly.
This review will improve and strengthen IFRC governance processes, with a focus on integrity matters with the Compliance and Mediation Committee; financial matters including in relation to failure to pay statutory contributions and financial regulations; governance appointment and election processes; minimum requirements for compliance with legal basis set by the IFRC and the Movement, and ethics.
Quality and performance
In 2024, IFRC network standards will be further raised by the introduction of a quality and performance delivery initiative.
This initiative will improve the ability to consistently deliver quality, effective and accountable programmes and operations that contribute to achieving greater collective impact for people and communities in situations of crisis. It promotes an organizational culture and mindset to achieve greater quality and impact. Through this initiative, the IFRC is developing tracking systems to detect early issues and set correctives measures. It will also improve decision-making through better information and analysis available.
The IFRC is also improving its emergency response system to ensure enhanced agility, relevance and efficiency while responding to crises. Through the revision of the Emergency Response Framework (ERF), launched in 2023 and which will continue in 
2024, the IFRC is increasing accountability, clarifying roles and responsibilities but also adapting the response system to all type of disasters including the largest and most complex ones. This initiative will make the IFRC better suited to be able to respond appropriately to any kind of crisis.
The IFRC’s commitment to placing the work of 
National Societies at the heart of the network’s activities was bolstered in 2022 and 2023 through the introduction of a unified planning process, in line with the ambitions of the Agenda for Renewal.

[Page 77]
Enabling functions
This approach to planning ensures that all international support provided to a National Society is fully coordinated and aligned with the priorities and capacities of the National Society itself, both for emergencies and longer-term support.
The unified planning process is designed to be transformative for National Societies. It is an integral part of how the IFRC works with the network at country level to build National Society capacities in the areas of greatest importance to their communities and context.
Each country’s unified plan – showing the support from the IFRC and participating National Societies working alongside the host National Society – will boost both effectiveness and accountability to communities and the partners who make the work possible. These plans will all be available on the 
IFRC’s public website.
National Societies will also be supported in 2024 to follow up their country plans with robust reporting. The planning and reporting cycle will improve accountability, increase donor confidence, and strengthen compliance-assured localization across the network. In the coming year, IFRC network country plans and reports will be carried out from a new 
IFRC global centre hosted in Delhi.
Security management
In 2024, the IFRC will continue to strengthen the security management capacities of National 
Societies and IFRC operations. Special focus will be given to security training for complex operations, particularly those in fragile and high-risk settings.
For example, in 2024 the IFRC will continue to work with the Lebanese Red Cross to offer Hostile 
Environment Training locally in Lebanon. This work will continue with the Lebanese Red Cross, the 
Hungarian Red Cross, Italian Red Cross together with the French Red Cross for training in West 
Africa. Localized security training of this kind allows 
National Societies to bring local-language security training to their volunteers and staff in the field.
New security and critical incident management training has been developed and will be rolled out across all IFRC regions in 2024, with a training of trainers component. An IFRC Security Information 
Management Platform will also be launched in 2024.
Priority will also be given to providing resources and support to ensure the safety and security of Red 
Cross and Red Crescent volunteers and community health workers.

[Page 79]
Red Cross Red Crescent Reference Centres
RED CROSS RED CRESCENT 
REFERENCE CENTRES
IFRC GLOBAL REFERENCE CENTRES
Climate Centre
The Climate Centre’s mission is to support the Red 
Cross and Red Crescent Movement and its partners in reducing the impacts of climate change and extreme-weather events on vulnerable people.
In 2024, the Climate Centre will continue to support the Movement with its climate agenda. We need ambitious action and strong engagement from National Societies around the globe to better protect the most vulnerable from the adverse impacts of the climate crisis. This requires continued support with regards to climate-related science, policy, practice and innovation, which is often based on ad-hoc requests that fall outside existing programming.
Global Disaster Preparedness Centre
The Global Disaster Preparedness Centre is a globally focused reference centre hosted by the 
American Red Cross in partnership with the IFRC. 
Its primary aim is to strengthen the disaster preparedness capacities of the IFRC network to help safeguard communities from future disasters and crises. Through promoting innovation and effective approaches to disaster preparedness, it strives to increase the impact of National Society preparedness activities.
For 2024 the Global Disaster Preparedness Centre will establish a new approach that builds upon proven areas of success, including innovation through research, piloting and scaling. This new approach will employ a Research and Development model focused on community-driven innovation in the areas of climate change, migration and displacement, and disaster preparedness. Emphasizing human centred design, we can identify, and test to quickly transition ownership of successfully piloted innovations to a pre-determined partner for scaling.
Hosted by the Netherlands Red Cross
2024 Funding requirement 
50,000 Euro https://preparecenter.org/
Hosted by the American Red Cross and IFRC
2024 Funding requirement 
500,000 Swiss francs

[Page 80]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
Global First Aid Reference Centre
The GFARC mission is to develop knowledge, good practices and standards, based on science and field expertise, that will inform the operations and services of the RCRC network in first aid, to advocate and build quality first aid education worldwide, with the ambition of reaching at least one person trained in first aid in every home, school and workplace (IFRC First Aid Vision 2030), and make the 
RCRC network a recognized lead stakeholder in first aid from local to global level.
The GFARC action is based on three complementary pillars: technical support to the RCRC network; 
Science & Expertise, and Advocacy for First Aid. Its priority areas, in line with the IFRC First Aid Vision 
2030, are: 1/ First Aid Education; 2/ Standards and Qualifications; 3/ Research, Evidence and 
Evaluation; 4/ First Aid in schools; 5/ Commercial 
First Aid; 6/ Prehospital emergency care and operations. Through its actions, the GFARC contributes to various IFRC global agendas such as climate resilience and migration.
Hosted by the French Red Cross
2024 Funding requirement operational budget 2024 1.7 million Swiss francs
Indonesia 2021 © Selly Melinda

[Page 81]
Red Cross Red Crescent Reference Centres
Livelihoods Resource Centre
The mission of the reference centre is to assist 
IFRC members in increasing awareness and use of effective livelihoods programming strategies to enhance community capacity and individuals’ skills and practices, which will restore and maintain sustainable livelihoods and economically secure living conditions.
Priority areas of work for 2024 include:
 •
Livelihoods in Migration and Displacement contexts.
 •
Climate-Smart and Environmentally 
Sustainable Livelihoods.
 •
Employment and micro-entrepreneurship programmes.
Psychosocial Support Centre
The Psychosocial Support Centre guides National 
Societies on community-based mental health and psychosocial support, contributing to the development and delivery of services to vulnerable groups, staff and volunteers. The centre generates evidence-based resources such as handbooks, videos and podcasts, and it provides technical advisory including assessments, training, quality assurance and activities to support the implementation, monitoring and evaluation of MHPSS initiatives. 
Furthermore, the PS Centre advocates for the integration of MHPSS across humanitarian work.
The Psychosocial Support Centre will continue to provide technical support and capacity-building, knowledge generation and sharing, and humanitarian diplomacy across key Movement challenges including the climate crisis, disasters and migration. The work will emphasize quality assurance of interventions, supervision and mentoring with the potential for scale-up. The PS Centre will continue to work with people affected by the Ukraine conflict and deepen its regional approach, strengthening local leadership and ownership of MHPSS integration across humanitarian activities.
livelihoodscentre.org/
Hosted by the Spanish Red Cross
2024 Funding requirement 
556,000 Swiss francs
Hosted by the Danish Red Cross
2024 Funding requirement 
2.6 million Swiss francs

[Page 82]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
IFRC REGIONAL REFERENCE CENTRES
Interamerican Centre for Volunteering 
Development
The 
Interamerican 
Centre for 
Volunteering 
Development (ICVD) supports National Societies in their strategies and objectives to promote and improve volunteering management and development, recognizing that investment in increasing the individual National Societies capacity contributes to collective effectiveness as a Movement. The 
ICVD advocates for volunteering as a continued fundamental pillar of the work of the Red Cross, re-positioning it at the centre of our work, whilst ensuring that our volunteers are protected, motivated, trained and engaged.
The ICVD will strengthen its main activities and tools to support the work of National Societies. 
This includes the development of the Volunteering 
Development Platform 2.0 (VODPLA), exchanges and Internships, developing a network of experts and Working Groups, as well as Volunteering Labs. 
It will implement the Volunteering Development 
Framework in the Americas and Volunteering 
Development Standards.
The ICVD focuses on volunteer learning, innovation and research, inclusion, development, volunteer leadership, governance, social action, ethics and education skills for sustainability. It provides tailored support to each National Society, focusing on their specific country plans. We also support 
National Societies to raise the voice of volunteers and effectively transmit their issues and concerns to national authorities and relevant stakeholders.
Reference Centre for Institutional 
Disaster Preparedness
The general objective of the Reference Centre for 
Disaster Preparedness (CREPD) is to assist the components of the Movement in the development of National Societies and other partners, through the development of methodologies, tools, learning techniques and harmonization processes, considering the expertise and best practices of the 
National Societies themselves, and under the coordination of the IFRC.
Priority areas of work for 2024:
 •
Strengthen the educational resources of the region, virtual campus of the Americas, networks, websites, development of regional curricula linked to surge.
 •
Strengthen networks of facilitators in different specialties, water, PGI, Migration, PPD, Climate and environment.
 •
Expand the coverage of support services to 
National Societies in thematic areas, lessons learned and evaluations.
 •
Develop new global educational products, EOC 
Guides, contingency plan guide, among others.
2024 Funding requirement 
500,000 Swiss francs
2024 Funding requirement 
550,000 Swiss francs

[Page 83]
Red Cross Red Crescent Reference Centres
Caribbean Disaster Risk Management 
Reference Centre (CADRIM)
The 
Caribbean 
Disaster 
Risk 
Management 
Reference Centre (CADRIM) has been actively working to build the capacity of 13 Caribbean National 
Societies through the delivery of training and adaptation of tools and methodologies in the areas of community resilience, disaster-risk reduction and preparedness. The centre continues to develop evidence-based data to further identify gaps and lessons learned to inform leadership decision making within the Red Cross Red Crescent Movement while supporting knowledge and information management initiatives in the Caribbean, the Americas and globally.
Priority areas of work for 2024:
 •
Regional Community Disaster Response Teams and National Disaster Response Teams facilitator training.
 •
Under the Caribbean Biodiversity Fund 
Project:
 » Coordination of a nature-based solutions/
The Nature Conservatory Blue Guide practitioners’ training and knowledge fair.
 » Development of knowledge management products and community of practice for nature-based solutions/ecosystem-based adaptation in the Caribbean.
 •
Research on community-based disaster-risk reduction and disaster preparedness.
Humanitarian Observatory
The Humanitarian Observatory is a space of research for action. Through knowledge and awareness, we seek to promote the understanding and approach of the different situations that emerge in society from a humanitarian perspective.
Priority areas of work for 2024:
 •
Access to evidence-based data for developing institutional strategies.
 •
Capacity-building support to National Societies in data collection and information management.
 •
Exchanges, support, and technical and operational assistance among National Societies, especially with data analysis and systematization tools.
 •
Strengthening and networking, associations, and organizations.
 •
Complementing the efforts of each National 
Society, providing specific services for the entire network in response to national and community demand for learning tools.
Hosted by the IFRC https://cruzroja.org.ar/observatorio-humanitario/
Hosted by the Argentine Red Cross
2024 Funding requirement 
660,000 Swiss francs

[Page 84]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
NATIONAL SOCIETY REFERENCE CENTRES
Reference Centre for 
Community Resilience
The Costa Rican Red Cross Reference Centre is an entity specializ in research, systematization, validation and analysis of methodologies for resilience and community education. It carries out actions to strengthen resilience in communities through internships, technical assistance missions, virtual collaboration and training, among others. It is at the service of the National Societies, the IFRC and other actors involved in risk reduction at community level and for the benefit of vulnerable communities.
Priority areas of work for 2024:
 •
Research and implementation of topics that are aligned with the needs of the national and regional environment (climate variability (carbon neutral), Early Warning System, Community 
Health, 
Mental 
Health and 
Psychosocial 
Support, Education and Public Awareness, road safety, migration, violence prevention, people with disabilities, and others).
 •
Identification, formulation, follow-up and systematization of projects and initiatives related to community resilience, as well as case studies on good practices.
 •
Development of online learning courses (campus cruzroja.org – Moodle), use of technological tools and social networks.
 •
Strengthening and updating of materials related to the “It is better to prevent. . . ” series and the 
AVCA (modules, videos, tools, among others).
Centre for Evidence-Based Practice (CEBaP) – Belgian Red Cross
The Centre for Evidence-Based Practice (CEBaP) provides a scientific basis for a wide range of humanitarian activities, from blood supply services to development programmes or emergency relief. This is achieved by collecting existing scientific studies in evidence reviews and by developing evidence-based guidelines (“secondary research”). 
Where gaps in evidence are identified, primary field studies are also conducted. In this way the centre aims to identify which activities are most (cost-) effective and seeks to achieve impact on research, practice and policy.
Priority areas of work for 2024 will include:
 •
First aid education: analysis of field study data about the effectiveness of first aid blended learning in Rwanda; update evidence-based manual on first aid for mental health problems; primary study on comparing recovery positions.
 •
First aid assistance & disaster preparedness: guideline about psychosocial support following traumatic events.
 •
Blood donors: guideline on blood donor recruitment in Africa; systematic review about eating/ drinking before blood donation; first year of 
PhD on MSM (men who have sex with men) and blood donation.
Hosted by the Costa Rican Red Cross
2024 Funding requirement 
100,000 Swiss francs
Hosted by the Belgian Red Cross-Flanders
2024 Funding requirement 
850,000 Swiss francs

[Page 85]
Red Cross Red Crescent Reference Centres
Foundation for Humanitarian and Social Research
The French Red Cross Foundation is a Frenchrecognized public utility foundation dedicated to research in the humanities and social sciences. Its aim is to contribute to improving practices in the humanitarian and social fields through research, in 
France and all over the world. It supports researchers by granting fellowships as well as prizes, and by developing collaborations with various academic institutions. To successfully complete its actions, the Foundation follows the values and principles of the International Red Cross and Red Crescent 
Movement and relies on scientific expertise and methodologies that underpin its identity and guarantee its efficiency.
Priority areas of work for 2024:
 •
As a founding member of the RC3 Research 
Consortium, the Foundation seeks to facilitate the coordination of the Consortium with a view to developing learning and knowledge exchange between research experts in the 
Movement.
 •
Launch an annual global research workshop and a quarterly newsletter.
 •
Organize a series of regional seminars.
 •
Engage on collaborative flagship research projects, focusing on issues of common concern to the Consortium’s members.
International Centre for 
Humanitarian Affairs
The mission of the reference centre is to build resilient and sustainable communities through generation of knowledge, capacity building, and influencing policy change using climate information and innovative approaches.
Priority areas of work for 2024:
 •
Digital financial systems in humanitarian settings •
Data and digital transformation •
Climate information and services •
Understanding changing climate and vulnerability •
Nature-based solutions •
Public health •
Innovative approaches and processes •
Understanding emerging urban risks •
Strengthening devolution and collaboration with government •
Social Inclusion •
Strengthening capacities of National Societies in the region •
Localization
Hosted by the French Red Cross
2024 Funding requirement 
30,000 Swiss francs
Hosted by the Kenya Red Cross
2024 Funding requirement 
2.6 million Swiss francs

[Page 86]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
Science Foundation of the Belgian Red Cross
People have a right to quality humanitarian action informed by robust evidence, not just tradition or good intentions. The mission of the Science 
Foundation of the Belgian Red Cross is to generate reliable evidence on (cost-) effectiveness of humanitarian action.
We have initially been active in research, mostly in the field of public health and pre-hospital care, but we are now broadening our scope to also include economic, sociological and ethical elements. The reason for this is that for many important health issues, people cannot be convinced by just providing them with more scientific data.
Transfusion Research Centre
The mission of the reference centre is to better understand blood transfusion in order to contribute to transfusion medicine and cell therapy. This is achieved in a high-tech biochemistry laboratory harbouring a (stem-) cell culture unit, molecular biology and state-of-the-art analytical equipment. 
The centre has a strong focus on platelets, investigating storage biology and platelet interactions with the immune system. We develop novel products derived from donated blood, in particular platelets. This includes platelet lysates, platelet-reinforced transplants and convalescent plasma.
The platelet biology team focuses on understanding ectodomain shedding which is related to cell storage and cell deterioration during storage.
The immunology team works on the development of a nasal spray against viral transmission of airborne viruses using convalescent donor plasma.
The innovation team builds on the platelet lysate portfolio with multiple collaborations in the cell and tissue therapy field, including a novel project in wound healing.
rodekruis.be/
Hosted by the Belgian Red Cross rodekruis.be/
Hosted by the Belgian Red Cross

[Page 87]
Red Cross Red Crescent Reference Centres
HUBS, LABS AND OTHER INITIATIVES
Anticipation Hub
Founded in March 2020, the Turkish Red Crescent 
Academy is an education, research, development and advocacy organization structured to produce knowledge in the fields of disasters, public health and humanitarian aid. The Red Crescent Academy conducts a wide range of activities including educational content development, planning and implementing training, management of distance learning systems, digital content creation, independent academic research, and publishing.
Priority areas of work for 2024 include the dissemination of knowledge across the National Society and public, the production of academic knowledge, and digital release of publications prepared according to research findings.
Cash Hub
The Cash Hub supports the scale-up and use of cash and voucher assistance (CVA) within the 
Movement, striving to put power directly into the hands of people in need. The Cash Hub is backed by a dedicated team of experts, who provide technical guidance to partners within the Movement, ensuring strategic advice and practical support. As the Cash Hub progresses, it aims to localize its services and functions as far as possible, empowering local actors.
The Cash Hub’s programme of activity centres around three key areas: Cash Ready Red Cross and 
Red Crescent National Societies; Cash School, and the Cash Hub Platform. Each of these areas works to support the growth of CVA in the Movement, and to enable National Societies to be ‘cash ready’ in order to improve the effectiveness of humanitarian action, giving greater dignity and choice to people in crisis.
kizilayakademi.org.tr/
Hosted by the Turkish Red Crescent
2024 Funding requirement 
750,000 Swiss francs cash-hub.org
Hosted by the British Red Cross

[Page 88]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
Global Advisory Panel on Corporate 
Governance and Risk Management of Blood Services
The Global Advisory Panel on Corporate Governance and Risk Management of Blood Services (GAP) provides specialized risk management and corporate governance advice and support to National Society blood programmes, to ensure safe, sustainable blood supplies for patients globally. It advocates for the establishment of safe, sustainable and resilient blood systems, promotes the adoption of best practice, facilitates knowledge sharing and partnerships, and provides post-disaster coordination assistance to affected blood services. It delivers programmes and activities at global, regional and individual country levels.
Priority areas of work for 2024:
 •
Blood Programme Risk Assessment: GAP’s 
Self-Assessment enables National Societies to identify areas of potential risk and provides tailored recommendations and strategies for risk management.
 •
Support and resources: Country, thematic or regional support to address challenges for 
National Society blood programs. Expansion of GAP’s free online knowledge hub of materials and tools.
 •
Voluntary blood donation: Advice, resources and training to assist National Societies to increase the number of voluntary donors to meet blood demand.
Global Road Safety Partnership
We deal with the sustainable reduction of roadcrash death and injury in low- and middle-income countries globally. We do so by leveraging the power of multi-sector road safety partnerships and engaging with front-line good practice road safety interventions. We play a powerful role in the capacity building of road safety practitioners and traffic police, engage in advocacy at all levels, develop and coordinate road safety programmes, and are a recognized expert source of road safety knowledge and good practice.
GRSP will continue to prioritize work in advocacy; traffic police capacity building and training; partners, National Societies, and road safety practitioners capacity building; education; partnership building and in steering members and partners towards evidence-based road safety interventions.
2024 Funding requirement 
700,000 Swiss francs grsproadsafety.org/

[Page 89]
Red Cross Red Crescent Reference Centres
Red Cross Red Crescent 
Global Migration Lab
The Red Cross Red Crescent Global Migration Lab is a Movement-wide initiative and resource designed to strengthen the Movement’s capacity to harness operational research and data for evidence-based humanitarian diplomacy and advocacy related to migration. The Lab also seeks to amplify the voices, expertise and lived experience of migrants to guide and inform migration-related policies and programmes and to promote a humanitarian agenda in global migration governance.
Priority areas of work for 2024 include:
 •
Producing research and tools to support the Movement to ensure the humanitarian diplomacy efforts, responses and program- ming in migration are based on sound evidence and expertise, using available data effectively.
 •
Building National Society capacity to undertake research on migration and facilitating action-research projects involving the Movement, academic institutions and local organizations.
 •
Assessing future trends in migration and contributing a humanitarian perspective to dialogue on migration policies and practices.
redcross.org.au/globalmigrationlab
Hosted by the Australian Red Cross
2024 Funding requirement 
170,000 Swiss francs
Panama 2023 © Hermanos Corallo

[Page 90]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
510: Improving humanitarian action with data and digital
510, the data and digital team of the Netherlands 
Red Cross, supports National Societies to improve speed, quality and cost-effectiveness of humanitarian aid by creating products and services using data and digital. In line with IFRC Digital Transformation 
Strategy, we are a technical partner for National 
Societies to use data for decision making and use digital products to increase the scale and impact of the humanitarian services.
Priority areas of work for 2024:
 •
Support National Societies to understand risk and forecast impact of hazards, in line with 
IFRC’s operational framework, by developing trigger models for hazards for Early Action 
Protocols, training and scaling-up the impactbased forecasting platform.
 •
Support the IFRC network with scaling up cash to 50 per cent by 2025, through improvement of CVA information management, facilitating digitalization of CVA (121 platforms), and integrating digitalization of complaints & feedback mechanisms in CVA.
 •
Support National Societies to engage with people affected at scale, learn from feedback and improve operational quality, by integrating data analysis in CEA, facilitating digitalization of 
CEA by scaling up the Digital Engagement Hub together with IFRC, and integrating other digital 
CEA products such as Helpful Information App and Social Media Listening •
Support National Societies to increase their digital maturity, by supporting National Societies to create their own digital transformation strategy.
 •
Promote data services for emergency support through the IFRC Network •
Support National Societies and their partners in landscape restoration and water projects, by integrating information management in the emergency WASH response.
Third Pillar Research Center
Balancing the state and the market, the ‘third pillar’ (i.e., any association of people that is neither public nor private) is a key sector in society. In contrast to the first two, the third pillar has received very little attention in academic and policy debates. Our centre aims to facilitate research on the third pillar’s relevance by providing empirical evidence on its size and importance for society.
Four research studies in 2024 will encompass a broad spectrum of the third pillar’s size and impact: (1) first global dataset on the size of the third pillar; (2) associations between several societal outcomes and the size of the third pillar; (3) empirical evidence on the benefits of voluntary unpaid donations (blood & plasma); (4) a deep dive into the third pillar’s role during the Ukraine refugee crisis.
Hosted by the Netherlands Red Cross third-pillar.org (under construction)
Hosted by the Belgian Red Cross – Flanders
2024 Funding requirement 
200,000 Swiss francs

[Page 93]
IFRC network country information
IFRC NETWORK 
COUNTRY INFORMATION
To provide the best and most tailored support to 
National Societies, the IFRC has over 50 delegations worldwide. Some of these delegations cover a single country, while others (country cluster delegations) group countries together. 
The IFRC’s delegations allow the IFRC to provide individually tailored support to National Societies, for their programming and development. 
The following pages are structured per region. You will find a map for each region that lists the location of the IFRC’s delegations. Afterwards, you will find a summary of information on the IFRC network’s work next year by country. 
For 2024, the IFRC has continued to implement unified planning, where the IFRC, the National Society and participating National Societies that provide support in that country come together to jointly plan wherever possible, ensuring better coordination with the goal of more impactful services. The plans also bring together emergency and longer-term work. The vast majority of these plans have been carried out with a one country/one plan approach.
For each country you see represented in this section, a far more detailed plan has been drafted with multiyear priorities and activities for 2024. The IFRC’s 
GO Platform also provides a wealth of country-level information related to the disaster response and preparedness actions of the IFRC network. The GO platform can be found here. The plans will also be available on the IFRC’s public website. The plans, associated reports, emergency appeals and DREF responses can be found on our Appeals database.

[Page 94]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
Regional Offices • Nairobi, Kenya • Panama City, Panama • Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia • Budapest, Hungary • Beirut, Lebanon
Delegations • Abuja (Nigeria, Togo, Benin and Ghana) • Addis Ababa (Ethiopia and Djibouti) • Antananarivo (Madagascar, Mauritius, Comoros and Seychelles) • Bangui (Central African Republic and Chad) • Dakar (Senegal, Cape Verde, Gambia and 
Mauritania) • Freetown (Sierra Leone, Liberia, Guinea and 
Guinea Bissau) • Harare (Zimbabwe, Zambia and Malawi) • Juba (South Sudan, Uganda and Tanzania) • Khartoum (Sudan and Eritrea) • Kinshasa (Democratic Republic of Congo, 
Congo, Rwanda and Burundi) • Maputo (Mozambique and Angola) • Nairobi (Kenya and Somalia) • Niamey (Niger, Burkina Faso, Mali and Ivory Coast) • Pretoria (South Africa, Botswana, Eswatini, 
Lesotho and Namibia) • Yaoundé (Cameroon, Gabon, Equatorial Guinea and Sao Tome and Principe) • Buenos Aires (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Paraguay and Uruguay) • Lima (Peru, Bolivia and Ecuador) • Port of Spain (English & Dutch speaking 
Caribbean) • Santo Domingo (Dominican Republic, Cuba and Haiti) • Tegucigalpa (Honduras, Costa Rica, El Salvador, 
Guatemala, Nicaragua and Panama) • Colombia • Venezuela • Bangkok (Thailand, Cambodia, Laos and Vietnam) • Beijing (East Asia) • Jakarta (Indonesia, Brunei, Singapore and Timor Leste) • New Delhi (India, Bhutan, Maldives and Sri Lanka) • Suva (Pacific islands) • Afghanistan • Bangladesh • Malaysia • Myanmar • Nepal • Democratic People’s Republic of Korea • Pakistan • Papua New Guinea • Philippines • Bishkek (Kyrgyzstan, Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, 
Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan) • Moscow (Russian Federation and Belarus) • Sarajevo (Central and South Eastern Europe) • Tbilisi (Georgia, Armenia and Azerbaijan) • Warsaw (Poland, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Ukraine) • Türkiye • Beirut (Lebanon and Iraq) • Tunis (Tunisia and Morocco) • Jordan • Iran, Islamic Republic of • Libya • Palestine • Syrian Arab Republic • Yemen
Representational Delegations • Addis Ababa (the African Union) • Brussels (the European Union) • Dubai (Gulf Cooperation Council) • New York (the United Nations)

[Page 95]
Freetown
Niamey
Abuja
Yaoundé
Kinshasa
Bangui
Khartoum
Juba
Nairobi
Addis Ababa
Antananarivo
Harare
Maputo
Pretoria
AFRICA
IFRC DELEGATIONS

[Page 96]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
ANGOLA
In support of Angola Red Cross
National Society staff____________________________ 77
National Society volunteers_________________ 4,665
National Society branches______________________ 18 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DAO001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment_________________170,000 
Disasters and crises_____________________7,073,700 
Health and wellbeing______________________513,558 
Migration and displacement_______________ 52,000 
Values, power and inclusion_______________ 60,630
Enabling functions______________________1,530,508
People to be reached
Climate and environment______________________________________________________________________________ 60,000 
Disasters and crises_____________________________________________________________________________________75,138 
Health and wellbeing__________________________________________________________________________________328,880
Migration and displacement___________________________________________________________________________ 30,000 
Values, power and inclusion__________________________________________________________________________328,880 
2024 Key priorities and actions • Operationalize Africa regional tree planting and care initiative.
 • Increase National Society’s understanding of IFRC emergency tools such as DREF and emergency appeal to increase efficiency and effectiveness of disaster response.
 • Strengthen volunteers’ capacity to carry out community-based health activities.
 • Continue to support at-risk communities to establish community gardens and sustainable agriculture. • Migration and restoring family links work for migrants and displaced in Angola including IDPs.
 • Foster community active participation in decision-making processes through community feedback mechanisms.
Participating National Societies
Italian Red Cross

[Page 97]
IFRC network country information
In support of Burkinabe Red Cross Society
National Society staff_______________________________________________________________________________________ 325 
National Society volunteers____________________________________________________________________________ 45,700 
National Society branches__________________________________________________________________________________ 45 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/DBF001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment_________________632,801 
Disasters and crises_____________________ 8,192,035 
Health and wellbeing____________________ 5,930,171 
Migration and displacement______________370,468 
Values, power and inclusion______________959,599 
Enabling functions________________________ 557,745 
People to be reached
Climate and environment_________________455,000 
Disasters and crises_______________________545,100 
Health and wellbeing___________________ 1,800,000 
Migration and displacement_____________ 235,000 
Values, power and inclusion______________332,929 
2024 Key priorities and actions • Health and Nutrition.
 • Disaster Preparedness and Response. • Water, Hygiene, Sanitation and Shelter. • Promotion of the Movement’s fundamental principles and humanitarian values, community involvement and accountability. • Community development and social protection/food security and livelihoods. • Child protection and education. • Climate change and the environment.
Participating National Societies
Belgian Red Cross, Finnish Red Cross, Luxembourg Red Cross, Norwegian Red Cross, Red Cross of 
Monaco, Spanish Red Cross
BURKINA FASO

[Page 98]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
BURUNDI
In support of Burundi Red Cross
National Society staff___________________________783 
National Society volunteers_______________560,084 
National Society branches___________________2,928 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DBI001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment_________________550,500 
Disasters and crises_____________________1,516,500 
Health and wellbeing____________________4,108,380 
Migration and displacement_____________ 206,500 
Values, power and inclusion_____________1,117,616 
Enabling functions________________________761,800 
People to be reached
Climate and environment______________________________________________________________________________ 35,000 
Disasters and crises____________________________________________________________________________________ 75,000 
Health and wellbeing________________________________________________________________________________2,500,000 
Migration and displacement___________________________________________________________________________ 50,000 
Values, power and inclusion__________________________________________________________________________ 217,940 
2024 Key priorities and actions • Environmental resilience.
 • Community health.
 • WASH.
 • Community resilience.
 • Protection, gender and inclusion.
Participating National Societies
Belgian Red Cross, Finnish Red Cross, French Red Cross, Luxembourg Red Cross, Spanish Red Cross

[Page 99]
IFRC network country information
CAMEROON
In support of Cameroon Red Cross Society
National Society staff___________________________ 117 
National Society volunteers________________ 72,000 
National Society branches_____________________419 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DCM001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment_______________1,620,000 
Disasters and crises____________________ 3,300,000 
Health and wellbeing___________________ 2,040,000 
Migration and displacement_____________ 654,000 
Values, power and inclusion_____________ 444,000 
Enabling functions_______________________ 480,000 
People to be reached
Climate and environment___________________________________________________________________________2,500,000 
Disasters and crises_________________________________________________________________________________2,500,000 
Health and wellbeing________________________________________________________________________________2,500,000 
Migration and displacement________________________________________________________________________2,500,000 
Values, power and inclusion________________________________________________________________________2,500,000 
Ongoing emergency appeals and DREF
MDRCM036 DREF, Landslide; MDRCM035 DREF, Population Movement
2024 Key priorities and actions • Build an efficient, competitive, proactive and innovative National Society. • Implement, for as long as necessary, services and operations in sufficient volumes that have a lasting impact on vulnerable communities and enable them to live with dignity.

[Page 100]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
CAPE VERDE
In support of Cape Verde Red Cross Society
National Society staff___________________________125
National Society volunteers_________________ 6,500
National Society branches______________________ 19
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environmental crises________ 685,192
Evolving crises and disasters_____________ 685,192
Growing gaps in health and wellbeing____256,947
Migration and Identity_____________________ 85,649
Values, power and inclusion_______________ 42,825
Enabling functions________________________650,933
People to be reached
Climate and environment______________________________________________________________________________ 49,000
Disasters and crises___________________________________________________________________________________223,000
Health and wellbeing__________________________________________________________________________________ 123,000
Values, power and inclusion_____________________________________________________________________________4,300
2024 Key priorities and actions • Improve the health and wellbeing of the most vulnerable people. • Organize emergency aid services for disaster victims.
 • Improve socio-economic conditions for vulnerable people and those affected by emergencies.
 • Sustainably strengthen the resilience of communities in the face of crises and disasters. Disseminate 
Fundamental Principles and humanitarian values of the Red Cross and International Humanitarian Law.
 • Promote education and protection of vulnerable children in emergencies.

[Page 101]
IFRC network country information
COMOROS
In support of Comoros Red Crescent
National Society staff____________________________ 21 
National Society volunteers_________________ 3,000 
National Society branches_____________________224 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DKM001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment_________________565,000 
Disasters and crises_____________________2,627,900 
Health and wellbeing______________________700,000 
Migration and displacement_____________ 200,000 
Values, power and inclusion_______________ 90,000 
Enabling functions________________________ 142,518 
People to be reached
Climate and environment______________________________________________________________________________ 40,000 
Disasters and crises____________________________________________________________________________________ 40,000 
Health and wellbeing___________________________________________________________________________________ 50,000 
Migration and displacement_______________________________________________________________________________200 
Values, power and inclusion_______________________________________________________________________________200 
2024 Key priorities and actions • Climate-smart programming, development of Early Action Protocols and strengthening people-centred and data-driven early warning. Continue to support the implementation of the early warning system initiated at national level or risk-reduction projects with PIROI.
 • Implement the Save Lives and Livelihoods Programme initiated by Africa CDC.
 • Establish a minimum emergency response system for migration.
 • Strengthen leadership and management skills of executive staff.

[Page 102]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
CONGO, REPUBLIC OF
In support of Congolese Red Cross
National Society staff____________________________ 22 
National Society volunteers________________ 13,000 
National Society branches_______________________ 6 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DCG001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment__________________ 20,000 
Disasters and crises_______________________620,000 
Health and wellbeing______________________355,000 
Migration and displacement_______________ 25,000 
Values, power and inclusion______________115,000 
Enabling functions_________________________ 60,000 
People to be reached
Climate and environment_____________________________________________________________________________ 125,000 
Disasters and crises___________________________________________________________________________________ 320,000 
Health and wellbeing__________________________________________________________________________________ 520,000 
Migration and displacement___________________________________________________________________________ 15,000 
Values, power and inclusion__________________________________________________________________________ 120,000 
2024 Key priorities and actions • Continue to support public authorities in campaigns to combat deforestation, and planting of trees in the north of the country.
 • Carry out awareness-raising activities in communities on environmental sanitation and personal hygiene, gender protection, restoring family links, food security and shelter. • Improve people’s health and wellbeing; strengthen health systems and advance universal health coverage; and prevent and combat health threats, including pandemics, using a “One Health” approach.
 • Implement community integration activities for the wellbeing of migrants and vulnerable communities.
 • Ensure that vulnerable and crisis-affected individuals and communities are empowered to influence decisions that affect them.
Participating National Societies
French Red Cross

[Page 103]
IFRC network country information
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO
In support of Red Cross of the 
Democratic Republic of the Congo
National Society staff___________________________104 
National Society volunteers_______________209,000 
National Society branches_____________________293 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DCD001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment_________________670,000 
Disasters and crises____________________ 8,552,376 
Health and wellbeing___________________ 17,147,376 
Migration and displacement______________487,376 
Values, power and inclusion____________ 1,439,123 
Enabling functions_____________________ 1,548,348 
People to be reached
Climate and environment_____________________________________________________________________________250,000 
Disasters and crises___________________________________________________________________________________450,000 
Health and wellbeing________________________________________________________________________________3,500,000 
Migration and displacement__________________________________________________________________________250,000 
Values, power and inclusion__________________________________________________________________________200,000 
2024 Key priorities and actions • Implement the Africa tree planting and care initiative by planting 4,000 trees/year.
 • Intensify the implementation of the Pan-African initiatives of “Preparedness and Readiness” and “Zero hunger”.
 • Reach 3.5 million people per year with health services adapted to the DRC context.
 • Assess, understand and effectively respond to the priority needs of 490,000 migrants, displaced persons and host communities each year.
 • Prioritize the development of volunteerism and youth action as key enablers of behaviour change and local action.
Participating National Societies
Belgian Red Cross, French Red Cross, Luxembourg Red Cross, Spanish Red Cross, Swedish Red Cross

[Page 104]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
EQUATORIAL GUINEA
In support of Red Cross of Equatorial 
Guinea
National Society staff____________________________ 26 
National Society volunteers____________________500 
National Society branches______________________ 13 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DGQ001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment__________________ 82,500 
Disasters and crises______________________ 225,500 
Health and wellbeing______________________715,000 
Values, power and inclusion_______________ 99,000 
Enabling functions_________________________ 88,000 
People to be reached
Climate and environment______________________________________________________________________________ 14,000 
Disasters and crises____________________________________________________________________________________ 14,000 
Health and wellbeing___________________________________________________________________________________ 14,000 
Values, power and inclusion___________________________________________________________________________ 14,000
2024 Key priorities and actions • The Equatorial Guinea Red Cross is part of the IFRC Global Climate Resilience Programme and will contribute to its goals.
 • Preparedness and readiness to respond to disasters, enhancing community risk reduction and resilience. • Develop a health and WASH strategy and a community health policy.
 • Scale up humanitarian education focusing on young people.

[Page 105]
IFRC network country information
GABON
In support of Gabonese Red Cross Society
National Society staff____________________________ 39 
National Society volunteers_________________ 1,500 
National Society branches_______________________ 9 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DGA001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment________________ 643,500 
Disasters and crises_______________________709,500 
Health and wellbeing___________________ 1,034,000 
Values, power and inclusion_____________ 330,000 
Enabling functions_______________________ 803,000 
People to be reached
Climate and environment_____________________________________________________________________________268,000 
Disasters and crises___________________________________________________________________________________268,000 
Health and wellbeing__________________________________________________________________________________268,000 
Values, power and inclusion__________________________________________________________________________268,000 
2024 Key priorities and actions • Tree planting and care.
 • Increase capacity to prevent and prepare for emergencies.
 • National Society development and sustainability.

[Page 106]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
GUINEA-BISSAU
In support of Red Cross Society of GuineaBissau
National Society staff____________________________ 18 
National Society volunteers_____________________ 15 
National Society branches______________________ 57 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DGW001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment______________ 1,430,000 
Disasters and crises____________________ 1,500,000 
Health and wellbeing___________________ 1,600,000 
Migration and displacement______________785,000 
Values, power and inclusion_____________ 840,000 
Enabling functions________________________825,000 
People to be reached
Climate and environment______________________________________________________________________________ 85,000 
Disasters and crises____________________________________________________________________________________ 85,000 
Health and wellbeing__________________________________________________________________________________ 289,000
Migration and displacement_____________________________________________________________________________9,000 
Values, power and inclusion_____________________________________________________________________________4,200 
2024 Key priorities and actions • Implement tree-planting project in two regions and train volunteers on disaster response.
 • Strengthen capacity on evolving climate and environmental disaster plan, response and management at community, regional and national levels.
 • Strengthen coordination and collaboration with community networks, schools, health-care providers, 
Civil Society organizations on evolving public health challenges.
 • Integrate migration and displacement dimensions and approaches into all humanitarian work.
 • Promote and support the systematic application of agreed minimum standards for protection, gender equality and integration in emergencies. 
Participating National Societies
Italian Red Cross

[Page 107]
IFRC network country information
GUINEA CONAKRY
In support of Red Cross Society of Guinea
National Society staff___________________________135 
National Society volunteers________________ 21,210 
National Society branches_____________________341 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DGN001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment______________ 1,480,000 
Disasters and crises____________________ 2,500,000 
Health and wellbeing___________________ 3,200,000 
Migration and displacement______________740,000 
Values, power and inclusion______________740,000 
Enabling functions______________________1,210,000 
People to be reached
Climate and environment_____________________________________________________________________________ 510,000 
Disasters and crises___________________________________________________________________________________ 687,000 
Health and wellbeing________________________________________________________________________________1,623,000 
Migration and displacement___________________________________________________________________________ 20,000 
Values, power and inclusion___________________________________________________________________________ 19,000 
2024 Key priorities and actions • HIV / AIDS through psychosocial support for people living with HIV, reproductive health and sexual rights, the fight against gender-based violence, community preparedness for epidemics and pandemics, community-based epidemiological surveillance, response to epidemics and pandemics.
 • Environmental education, environment-related health promotion, food security promotion, climate- change adaptation of vulnerable communities.
 • Disaster-risk reduction in vulnerable communities, assistance to disaster victims, early warning systems.
 • Humanitarian assistance to migrants including protection, health, emergency assistance in food, housing and socio-economic reintegration.

[Page 108]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
IVORY COAST
In support of Red Cross of Côte d’Ivoire
National Society staff___________________________169 
National Society volunteers________________ 12,800 
National Society branches_____________________ 111 
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment_______________ 1,254,181 
Disasters and crises_______________________591,364 
Health and wellbeing____________________1,080,022 
Migration and displacement____________ 1,109,686 
Values, power and inclusion______________549,475 
Enabling functions________________________775,318 
People to be reached
Climate and environment_____________________________________________________________________________455,000 
Disasters and crises___________________________________________________________________________________ 545,100 
Health and wellbeing___________________________________________________________________________________ 29,000 
Migration and displacement____________________________________________________________________________12,371 
Values, power and inclusion____________________________________________________________________________92,271 
2024 Key priorities and actions • Implement the regional tree-planting and care initiative, to combat deforestation continuing in the centre-east of the country. • Improve social protection, securing livelihoods, sustainably increasing the availability of and access to basic foodstuffs, and improving operational capacities in emergency situations.
 • Strengthen the community health and nutrition system, ensure access to primary health care, facilitate access to safe drinking water and ensure the availability and sustainable management of water, hygiene and sanitation.
 • Create humanitarian service points in operational areas to welcome, advise and support migrants.
 • Institutionalize community engagement and accountability through the CEA BOOSTER project.
Participating National Societies
Japanese Red Cross Society, Red Cross of Monaco, The Netherlands Red Cross

[Page 109]
IFRC network country information
KENYA
In support of Kenya Red Cross Society
National Society staff__________________________ 707 
National Society volunteers______________ 207,242 
National Society branches_____________________ 65 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DKE001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment_______________ 8,141,557 
Disasters and crises___________________ 19,432,610 
Health and wellbeing__________________ 15,657,223 
Migration and displacement____________1,252,194 
Values, power and inclusion____________1,885,281 
Enabling functions_____________________ 6,288,739 
People to be reached
Climate and environment__________________________________________________________________________ 1,500,000 
Disasters and crises________________________________________________________________________________ 3,000,000 
Health and wellbeing_______________________________________________________________________________ 4,500,000 
Migration and displacement_________________________________________________________________________ 200,000 
Values, power and inclusion_________________________________________________________________________ 200,000 
Ongoing emergency appeals and DREF
MDRS100 Emergency Appeal, Population Movement; MDRKE055 DREF, Drought; MDRKE053 DREF, Flood
2024 Key priorities and actions • Implement the IFRC Africa tree-planting and care initiative.
 • Implement the IFRC Africa region Zero Hunger initiative. • Implement the IFRC Red Ready initiative.
 • Facilitate community access to sustainable livelihood opportunities and access to basic services.
 • Community health and resilience, health system strengthening, mental health and psychosocial support and WASH.
Participating National Societies
American Red Cross, British Red Cross, Danish Red Cross, Finnish Red Cross, Italian Red Cross, 
Norwegian Red Cross

[Page 110]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
LIBERIA
In support of Liberian Red Cross Society
National Society staff____________________________ 41 
National Society volunteers_________________ 3,707 
National Society branches______________________ 15 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DLR001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment______________ 1,350,000 
Disasters and crises____________________ 1,655,000 
Health and wellbeing___________________ 2,580,000 
Migration and displacement_____________ 790,000 
Values, power and inclusion___________ 1,240,000 
Enabling functions_____________________ 1,620,000 
People to be reached
Climate and environment____________________________________________________________________________ 194,000 
Disasters and crises___________________________________________________________________________________680,000 
Health and wellbeing__________________________________________________________________________________850,000 
Migration and displacement___________________________________________________________________________ 20,000 
Values, power and inclusion_____________________________________________________________________________ 7,000 
Ongoing emergency appeals and DREF
MDRLR007 DREF, Flood
2024 Key priorities and actions • Implement the IFRC Global Climate Resilience Programme. • Implement nature-based solutions, including tree planting and greening, in line with the IFRC’s PanAfrican Tree Planting and Care Initiative.
 • Set up anticipatory mechanisms through forecast-based financing to enable communities to act ahead of predicted disasters.
 • Establish community-based early warning systems and conduct a hazard mapping exercise in 15 chapters.
 • Develop a health strategy.
 • Establish a Humanitarian Service Point at National Society headquarters and in eight major counties with migratory routes.
Participating National Societies
Swedish Red Cross

[Page 111]
IFRC network country information
MADAGASCAR
In support of Malagasy Red Cross Society
National Society staff___________________________126 
National Society volunteers_________________ 1,380 
National Society branches_____________________ 141 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DMG001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment________________ 300,000 
Disasters and crises_______________________199,500 
Health and wellbeing______________________100,000 
Enabling functions________________________335,889 
People to be reached
Climate and environment______________________________________________________________________________ 30,000 
Disasters and crises____________________________________________________________________________________ 70,000 
Health and wellbeing__________________________________________________________________________________300,000 
Values, power and inclusion_______________________________________________________________________________300 
Ongoing emergency appeals and DREF
MDRMG021 DREF, Elections readiness 
2024 Key priorities and actions • Tree planting and the adoption of climate-smart agriculture (Africa tree planting and care initiative).
 • Implement the IFRC Zero hunger initiative through the development of long-term strategy on food & nutrition security and resilient livelihoods.
 • Develop multi-hazard continuity plans and participate in the analysis, drafting and implementation of effective disaster laws and policies, such as the National Plan to Combat Drought in Madagascar (IFRC 
Africa Preparedness and readiness initiative). • Continue to strengthen digitalization and the development of electronic volunteer database.
Participating National Societies
French Red Cross

[Page 112]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
MOZAMBIQUE
In support of Mozambique 
Red Cross Society
National Society staff___________________________165 
National Society volunteers_________________ 6,862 
National Society branches_____________________ 111 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DMZ001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment_______________7,478,070 
Disasters and crises____________________ 5,525,409 
Health and wellbeing____________________7,646,073 
Migration and displacement______________984,727 
Values, power and inclusion______________ 426,163 
Enabling functions________________________604,750 
People to be reached
Climate and environment_____________________________________________________________________________350,000 
Disasters and crises___________________________________________________________________________________350,000 
Health and wellbeing________________________________________________________________________________1,000,000 
Migration and displacement_____________________________________________________________________________5,000 
Values, power and inclusion___________________________________________________________________________ 30,000 
2024 Key priorities and actions • First aid.
 • Forecast-based financing.
 • Health and social services, hygiene and sanitation.
 • Psycho-social wellbeing.
 • Disaster and crisis preparedness and response, recovery, disaster management systems.
Participating National Societies
Belgian Red Cross, French Red Cross, German Red Cross, Spanish Red Cross, Swedish Red Cross

[Page 113]
IFRC network country information
NIGERIA
In support of Nigerian Red Cross Society
National Society staff___________________________146 
National Society volunteers________________ 18,665 
National Society branches______________________ 37 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DNG001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment_______________3,071,398 
Disasters and crises_____________________1,783,830 
Health and wellbeing____________________3,706,756 
Migration and displacement______________215,000 
Values, power and inclusion______________ 237,516 
Enabling functions______________________2,204,841 
People to be reached
Climate and environment______________________________________________________________________________ 48,322 
Disasters and crises___________________________________________________________________________________ 963,279 
Health and wellbeing__________________________________________________________________________________ 642,971 
Migration and displacement____________________________________________________________________________12,920 
Values, power and inclusion___________________________________________________________________________ 39,455 
Ongoing emergency appeals and DREF
MDRNG037 Emergency Appeal, Epidemic
2024 Key priorities and actions • Livelihoods.
 • Shelter.
 • Climate change.
 • Migration.
 • Restoring family links.
 • Cash transfer programming.
 • Disaster-risk reduction.
 • Community first aid.
Participating National Societies
British Red Cross, Italian Red Cross, Norwegian Red Cross

[Page 114]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
SÃO TOMÉ AND PRINCIPE
In support of São Tomé and 
Principe Red Cross
National Society staff ___________________________ 43 
National Society volunteers___________________ 340 
National Society branches_______________________ 5 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DST001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment__________________ 71,500 
Disasters and crises________________________ 71,500 
Health and wellbeing______________________293,700 
Values, power and inclusion_______________ 20,900 
Enabling functions_______________________ 228,800 
People to be reached
Climate and environment______________________________________________________________________________ 22,000 
Disasters and crises____________________________________________________________________________________ 22,000 
Health and wellbeing___________________________________________________________________________________ 22,000 
Values, power and inclusion___________________________________________________________________________ 22,000 
2024 Key priorities and actions • Institutional development.
 • Information and dissemination.
 • Health, social protection and protection of women.
 • Aid and disasters.
 • Youth and culture of peace.

[Page 115]
IFRC network country information
SENEGAL
In support of Senegalese Red Cross
National Society staff___________________________ 115 
National Society volunteers________________ 30,000 
National Society branches____________________ 446 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DST001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment_________________275,315 
Disasters and crises_______________________ 547,123 
Health and wellbeing____________________1,692,578 
Migration and displacement_____________ 200,000
Values, power and inclusion ______________210,663
Enabling functions______________________ 1,214,871
People to be reached
Climate and environment______________________________________________________________________________ 20,000
Disasters and crises____________________________________________________________________________________ 50,000 
Health and wellbeing__________________________________________________________________________________ 170,000
Migration and displacement_____________________________________________________________________________5,000 
Values, power and inclusion_____________________________________________________________________________2,500 
2024 Key priorities and actions • Disaster preparedness and response (floods, food insecurity, climate change).
 • Health (malnutrition, communication with beneficiaries).
 • First aid training.
 • Promotion of humanitarian ideals and values.
 • Dissemination of international humanitarian law and awareness of respect for the Red Cross emblem.

[Page 116]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
SEYCHELLES
In support of Seychelles Red Cross Society
National Society staff_____________________________ 8 
National Society volunteers_____________________ 84 
National Society branches________________________1 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DSC001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment_________________150,000 
Disasters and crises_______________________416,200 
Health and wellbeing_____________________ 200,000 
Values, power and inclusion_______________ 50,000 
Enabling functions________________________350,489 
People to be reached
Climate and environment______________________________________________________________________________ 10,000 
Disasters and crises____________________________________________________________________________________ 10,000 
Health and wellbeing___________________________________________________________________________________ 10,000 
Values, power and inclusion___________________________________________________________________________ 10,000 
2024 Key priorities and actions • Forecast the impacts of climate change with partners, such as the PIROI/French Red Cross, through a massive data collection with volunteers.
 • Continue to be part of the national initiative on early warning system. • Pursue the partnership between the Mastercard Foundation and Africa CDC to hasten economic recovery on the continent against COVID-19 through risk communication and community engagement activities.

[Page 117]
IFRC network country information
SIERRA LEONE
In support of Sierra Leone 
Red Cross Society
National Society staff____________________________ 59 
National Society volunteers_________________ 4,490 
National Society branches______________________ 13 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DSL001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment_______________2,130,000 
Disasters and crises_____________________1,630,000 
Health and wellbeing___________________ 3,480,000 
Migration and displacement______________650,000 
Values, power and inclusion_____________ 990,000 
Enabling functions______________________1,050,000 
People to be reached
Climate and environment_____________________________________________________________________________ 231,000 
Disasters and crises___________________________________________________________________________________338,000 
Health and wellbeing________________________________________________________________________________1,340,000 
Migration and displacement___________________________________________________________________________ 28,000 
Values, power and inclusion__________________________________________________________________________ 113,000 
2024 Key priorities and actions • Restore and maintain vegetation of degraded lands in programme communities. • Support community understanding of Early Warning, and use of early warning signs. • Improve WASH facilities and practices in programme communities. • Strengthen existing systems on migration and enhance wellbeing of survivors of illegal migration. • Implement the PGI Organizational capacity assessment to adopt a comprehensive protection, gender and inclusion approach across operations and programmes.
Participating National Societies
British Red Cross, Finnish Red Cross, Icelandic Red Cross

[Page 118]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
SOMALIA
In support of Somali Red Crescent Society
National Society staff_________________________1,183 
National Society volunteers__________________5,169 
National Society branches______________________ 19 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DSO001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment______________ 1,360,560 
Disasters and crises_____________________2,477,439 
Health and wellbeing__________________ 14,222,755 
Migration and displacement_______________ 15,000 
Values, power and inclusion____________1,892,000 
Enabling functions________________________991,454 
People to be reached
Climate and environment_____________________________________________________________________________ 340,753 
Disasters and crises___________________________________________________________________________________600,000 
Health and wellbeing________________________________________________________________________________2,432,732 
Migration and displacement___________________________________________________________________________ 20,000 
Values, power and inclusion___________________________________________________________________________ 65,662 
Ongoing emergency appeals and DREF
MDRSO016 DREF, Flood
2024 Key priorities and actions • Somali Red Crescent Society’s Integrated Health Care Programme, with its network of static and mobile health clinics across the country, is a critical provider of health care in the country.
 • National Society Development.
 • Strengthening of PSEA/safeguarding.
 • Capacity building of staff and volunteers.
 • National Society statutes revision.
 • Development of information technology guidelines.
 • Enhancing community engagement and accountability strategy/policy.
Participating National Societies
British Red Cross, Danish Red Cross, Finnish Red Cross, German Red Cross, Icelandic Red Cross, 
Norwegian Red Cross, Qatar Red Crescent Society, Swedish Red Cross, The Canadian Red Cross Society, 
The Netherlands Red Cross

[Page 119]
IFRC network country information
SOUTH SUDAN
In support of South Sudan Red Cross
National Society staff___________________________276 
National Society volunteers________________ 19,009 
National Society branches_____________________102 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DSS001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment_______________7,879,289 
Disasters and crises_____________________7,564,321 
Health and wellbeing___________________ 6,845,398 
Migration and displacement___________ 3,550,000 
Values, power and inclusion____________1,700,000 
Enabling functions______________________3,425,183 
People to be reached
Climate and environment_____________________________________________________________________________ 710,880 
Disasters and crises___________________________________________________________________________________ 520,000 
Health and wellbeing________________________________________________________________________________2,387,308 
Migration and displacement__________________________________________________________________________250,000 
Values, power and inclusion________________________________________________________________________ 1,085,578 
2024 Key priorities and actions • Respond to new and ongoing emergencies including population movement emergency, floods and hunger.
 • Implement the Food and Nutrition Resilience Programme, with focus on nature-based and ecosystem solutions.
 • The South Sudan REACH (Resilient and Empowered African Community Health) programme, in line with the continental initiative, to scale up the community health workforce in South Sudan to 17,221 community health workers.
 • Mainstream the Protection, Gender and Inclusion perspective across programming and response activities, and continue to strengthen the caring for staff and volunteers.
Participating National Societies
Danish Red Cross, Finnish Red Cross, German Red Cross, Norwegian Red Cross, Swedish Red Cross, 
Swiss Red Cross, The Canadian Red Cross Society, The Netherlands Red Cross, Turkish Red Crescent

[Page 120]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
TANZANIA
In support of Tanzania Red Cross 
National Society staff___________________________523 
National Society volunteers_______________135,073 
National Society branches___________________1,489 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DTZ001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment_________________627,000 
Disasters and crises____________________ 2,035,000 
Health and wellbeing____________________3,123,723 
Migration and displacement_____________ 230,000 
Values, power and inclusion______________170,000 
Enabling functions_______________________ 373,000 
People to be reached
Climate and environment_____________________________________________________________________________500,000 
Disasters and crises___________________________________________________________________________________300,000 
Health and wellbeing________________________________________________________________________________1,200,000 
Migration and displacement__________________________________________________________________________248,000 
Values, power and inclusion____________________________________________________________________________10,702 
2024 Key priorities and actions • Use branch and sub-branch network to conduct tree-planting campaigns across the country to complement the global mission. • Mainstream Cash Transfer Modality in Programmes and Emergency Operations.
 • Use existing health programmes to conduct capacity building for community health workers.
 • Build relationships with local communities through a strategic community engagement process as key sustainability strategy for all projects.
Participating National Societies
American Red Cross, Finnish Red Cross, Japanese Red Cross Society, Kenya Red Cross Society, Spanish 
Red Cross

[Page 121]
IFRC network country information
UGANDA
In support of The Uganda 
Red Cross Society
National Society staff___________________________254 
National Society volunteers_________________ 2,980 
National Society branches______________________ 51 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DUG001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment__________________ 19,289 
Health and wellbeing______________________250,000 
Migration and displacement_____________ 400,000 
Enabling functions____________________ 12,645,677 
People to be reached
Climate and environment_____________________________________________________________________________700,000 
Disasters and crises___________________________________________________________________________________900,000 
Health and wellbeing________________________________________________________________________________1,050,000 
Migration and displacement__________________________________________________________________________500,000 
Values, power and inclusion__________________________________________________________________________550,000 
Ongoing emergency appeals and DREF
MDRUG048 DREF, Flood
2024 Key priorities and actions • Disseminate the institutional Going Green Policy, previously developed as part of the ECHO 
Programmatic Partnership. • Under the ECHO Programmatic Partnerships, focus on reinforcing Early Warning Systems in high-risk districts. • Develop a robust Health/WASH strategy to guide operations.
 • Provide skills capacity development for economic engagement is provided to returnees and immigrants, protection against gender-based violence, provision of referral pathways, mobilize host communities for peaceful coexistence.
Participating National Societies
Austrian Red Cross, Belgian Red Cross, German Red Cross, The Netherlands Red Cross

[Page 122]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
Santo Domingo
Tegucigalpa
Venezuela
Colombia
Lima
Buenos Aires
Port of Spain
AMERICAS
IFRC DELEGATIONS

[Page 123]
IFRC network country information
ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA
In support of Antigua and 
Barbuda Red Cross
National Society staff______________________________7 
National Society volunteers_____________________ 83 
National Society branches_______________________ 3 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DAG001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment_________________250,000 
Disasters and crises_______________________425,000 
Health and wellbeing_______________________ 30,000 
Enabling functions________________________250,000 
People to be reached
Climate and environment__________________________________________________________________________________200 
Disasters and crises_________________________________________________________________________________________ 30 
Health and wellbeing_______________________________________________________________________________________300 
2024 Key priorities and actions • Use the national climate risk assessment being implemented as a first step on the climate action journey.
 • Train volunteers as first responders.
 • Implement first aid to support communities and as an avenue for financial sustainability.
 • Review of the National Society’s Statutes.
 • Create a National Society Development Plan.

[Page 124]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
ARGENTINA
In support of Argentine Red Cross
National Society staff_________________________1,798 
National Society volunteers_________________ 8,000 
National Society branches______________________ 66 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DAR001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment_________________575,000 
Disasters and crises_______________________975,000 
Health and wellbeing___________________ 1,500,000 
Migration and displacement_____________ 500,000 
Values, power and inclusion______________375,000 
Enabling functions______________________1,050,000 
People to be reached
Climate and environment______________________________________________________________________________ 15,000 
Disasters and crises____________________________________________________________________________________ 30,000 
Health and wellbeing___________________________________________________________________________________ 16,500 
Migration and displacement___________________________________________________________________________ 20,000 
Values, power and inclusion_____________________________________________________________________________1,500 
2024 Key priorities and actions • Accompany people and communities in complex situations, crises and disasters.
 • Strengthen the resilience of individuals and communities.
 • Promote healthy, safe and inclusive lives for all. • Comprehensive emergency and disaster-risk management. • First aid. • Education.
Participating National Societies
German Red Cross

[Page 125]
IFRC network country information
THE BAHAMAS
In support of The Bahamas 
Red Cross Society
National Society staff____________________________ 61 
National Society volunteers____________________461 
National Society branches______________________ 16 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DBS001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment_________________150,000 
Disasters and crises_______________________100,000 
Health and wellbeing______________________170,000 
Enabling functions_________________________ 60,000 
People to be reached
Climate and environment________________________________________________________________________________5,000 
Disasters and crises______________________________________________________________________________________5,000 
Health and wellbeing_____________________________________________________________________________________6,000 
Values, power and inclusion_____________________________________________________________________________2,500 
2024 Key priorities and actions • Meals on wheels.
 • Junior Red Cross.
 • Youth after school mentoring programme.
 • First aid/CPR Training.
 • Ambulance service.
 • Disaster and emergency relief assistance.
 • Backyard farming.
 • Family island service.

[Page 126]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
BARBADOS
In support of The Barbados 
Red Cross Society
National Society staff_____________________________ 8 
National Society volunteers____________________144 
National Society branches________________________1 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DBB001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment__________________ 11,500 
Disasters and crises________________________ 50,000 
Health and wellbeing_______________________ 10,000 
Enabling functions_________________________ 50,000 
People to be reached
Climate and environment___________________________________________________________________________________ 50 
Disasters and crises______________________________________________________________________________________2,200 
Health and wellbeing_______________________________________________________________________________________ 250 
2024 Key priorities and actions • Build National Society resilience in disaster management and preparedness.
 • Redesign and enhance the Ministry of Welfare Meals on Wheels programme for greater impact.
 • Increase and diversify youth volunteers, enhancing volunteer fulfilment and retention, and boosting youth volunteer capacity.
 • Establish comprehensive governance and compliance mechanisms, and developing robust Monitoring, 
Evaluation, Accountability, and Learning (MEAL) systems.

[Page 127]
IFRC network country information
BELIZE
In support of Belize Red Cross Society
National Society staff____________________________ 11 
National Society volunteers_____________________ 87 
National Society branches________________________7 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DBZ001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment_________________261,000 
Disasters and crises______________________ 352,500 
Health and wellbeing______________________255,000 
Migration and displacement_______________ 20,000 
Values, power and inclusion_____________ 200,000 
Enabling functions________________________130,000 
People to be reached
Climate and environment__________________________________________________________________________________ 100 
Disasters and crises________________________________________________________________________________________ 250 
Health and wellbeing_______________________________________________________________________________________500 
Migration and displacement_______________________________________________________________________________400 
Values, power and inclusion_______________________________________________________________________________200 
2024 Key priorities and actions • Disaster management (preparedness, response, and recovery).
 • Disaster-risk reduction and mitigation.
 • HIV and AIDS prevention through Peer Education, first aid and prevention of communicable diseases.
 • Home Nursing and Social Assistance.
 • Dissemination of the Seven Fundamental Principles and Humanitarian Values.

[Page 128]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
BRAZIL 
In support of Brazilian Red Cross
National Society staff_________________________1,810 
National Society volunteers________________ 11,790 
National Society branches______________________ 69 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DBR001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Enabling functions________________________150,000 
2024 Key priorities and actions • Improve compliance and internal control techniques, through the strengthening of the Compliance and 
Internal Controls Department.
 • Update Statutes, Regulations and Codes to ensure effective Governance, Management, Advice and 
Support, in line with the recommendations of the IFRC.
 • Improve internal development processes at local and national levels with the aim of strengthening institutional leadership, volunteer and staff capacities, and financial and accounting systems.

[Page 129]
IFRC network country information
CHILE 
In support of Chilean Red Cross
National Society staff____________________________ 18 
National Society volunteers_________________ 3,000 
National Society branches_____________________158 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DCL001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment_________________175,000 
Disasters and crises_______________________165,000 
Health and wellbeing_____________________ 360,000 
Migration and displacement______________100,000 
Values, power and inclusion_______________ 75,000 
Enabling functions_______________________ 200,000 
People to be reached
Climate and environment________________________________________________________________________________ 7,000 
Disasters and crises______________________________________________________________________________________5,000 
Health and wellbeing___________________________________________________________________________________ 10,000 
Migration and displacement_____________________________________________________________________________ 7,000 
Values, power and inclusion_____________________________________________________________________________3,000 
2024 Key priorities and actions • Health.
 • Risk Management.
 • Communications and resource mobilization.
 • Financial transparency.
 • Institutional development.
Participating National Societies
German Red Cross, Italian Red Cross

[Page 130]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
COLOMBIA
In support of Colombian Red Cross Society
National Society staff___________________________649 
National Society volunteers________________ 25,722 
National Society branches_____________________209 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DCO001
People to be reached
Climate and environment______________ 2,888,000 
Disasters and crises_____________________2,561,928 
Health and wellbeing___________________ 2,834,929 
Migration and displacement____________4,763,856 
Values, power and inclusion____________5,100,000 
Enabling functions________________________265,928
2024 Key priorities and actions • Contribute as a member of the IFRC Global Champions of Resilience and Climate Change.
 • Update Institutional Contingency Plans and conduct a self-assessment, simulation and feasibility study of cash transfers.
 • Community strengthening actions for surveillance and response to outbreaks and pandemic alerts.
 • Provide humanitarian assistance to people on the move through a comprehensive, complementary and coordinated offer that allows the coverage of their basic needs. protection of human rights, and that promotes stabilization and socio-economic integration.
Participating National Societies
American Red Cross, German Red Cross, Norwegian Red Cross, Spanish Red Cross, The Canadian Red 
Cross Society

[Page 131]
IFRC network country information
COSTA RICA 
In support of Costa Rican Red Cross
National Society staff_________________________1,236 
National Society volunteers__________________ 4,761 
National Society branches_____________________133 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DCR001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment_________________100,000 
Disasters and crises_______________________315,000 
Health and wellbeing_______________________68,800 
Migration and displacement______________520,000 
Values, power and inclusion______________190,000 
Enabling functions_______________________ 904,000 
People to be reached
Climate and environment________________________________________________________________________________5,000 
Disasters and crises________________________________________________________________________________________500 
Health and wellbeing___________________________________________________________________________________ 25,000 
Migration and displacement_____________________________________________________________________________6,000 
Values, power and inclusion_______________________________________________________________________________380 
Ongoing emergency appeals and DREF
MDRCR024 DREF, Flood; MDRCR023 DREF, Epidemic; MDRCR022 DREF, Volcanic Eruption
2024 Key priorities and actions • Emergency response.
 • Pre-hospital care.
 • Rescue unit.
 • Risk reduction.
 • Community engagement and accountability. • Re-establishment of Family Links.
 • Collaboration in the establishment of temporary shelters.
 • Youth programme.
 • Community training in Risk Reduction and first aid, etc.

[Page 132]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
DOMINICA
In support of Dominica Red Cross Society
National Society staff_____________________________ 6 
National Society volunteers____________________200 
National Society branches______________________ 10 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DDM001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment________________ 225,000 
Disasters and crises_______________________205,000 
Health and wellbeing_______________________ 25,000 
Values, power and inclusion________________ 5,000 
Enabling functions_________________________ 55,000 
People to be reached
Climate and environment__________________________________________________________________________________250 
Disasters and crises________________________________________________________________________________________500 
Health and wellbeing_______________________________________________________________________________________ 100
Values, power and inclusion_______________________________________________________________________________ 150 
2024 Key priorities and actions • Engage and train volunteers alongside the dedication of youth and senior management, to promote sustainable environmental practices.
 • Implement community-led Disaster-risk reduction activities in urban and rural areas by conducting enhanced Vulnerability and Capacity Assessments and developing and implementing community plans of action. • Provide communities with improved access to safe water and equip them with knowledge and best practices concerning the treatment and reuse of wastewater.
 • Provide increased technical and financial support for youth-led educational initiatives and actions.

[Page 133]
IFRC network country information
GRENADA
In support of Grenada Red Cross Society
National Society staff____________________________ 13 
National Society volunteers_____________________ 89 
National Society branches________________________1 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DGD001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment________________ 240,000 
Disasters and crises______________________ 245,000 
Health and wellbeing_______________________ 70,000 
Migration and displacement_______________ 25,000 
Values, power and inclusion_______________ 20,000 
Enabling functions_________________________ 35,000 
People to be reached
Climate and environment__________________________________________________________________________________500 
Disasters and crises________________________________________________________________________________________800 
Health and wellbeing_____________________________________________________________________________________1,500 
Migration and displacement_______________________________________________________________________________200 
Values, power and inclusion_______________________________________________________________________________200
2024 Key priorities and actions • Implement community-focused nature-based solutions to adapt to climate change.
 • Develop and carry out advocacy strategies to implement the recommendations of the IDRL Report for 
Grenada.
 • Expand first aid programme to reach more communities and individuals.
 • Provide guidance and support related to humanitarian services needed by displaced people and migrants. • Ensure safeguarding across all services and operations.

[Page 134]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
GUATEMALA
In support of Guatemalan Red Cross
National Society staff___________________________259 
National Society volunteers__________________1,730 
National Society branches______________________ 21 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DGT001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment_________________203,072 
Disasters and crises____________________ 1,364,093 
Health and wellbeing______________________324,387 
Migration and displacement______________770,257 
Values, power and inclusion______________356,049 
Enabling functions______________________1,628,245 
People to be reached
Climate and environment______________________________________________________________________________ 10,000 
Disasters and crises____________________________________________________________________________________ 20,000 
Health and wellbeing___________________________________________________________________________________ 20,000
Migration and displacement___________________________________________________________________________ 40,242
Values, power and inclusion_____________________________________________________________________________1,000 
Ongoing emergency appeals and DREF
MDRGT021 DREF, Civil Unrest; MDRGT020 DREF, Epidemic
2024 Key priorities and actions • Disaster preparedness and response.
 • Climate change.
 • Community resilience.
 • Health.
 • Migration. • Social inclusion.
Participating National Societies
American Red Cross, German Red Cross, Spanish Red Cross

[Page 135]
IFRC network country information
GUYANA
In support of The Guyana Red Cross Society
National Society staff____________________________ 11 
National Society volunteers____________________150 
National Society branches_______________________ 3 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DGY001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment__________________ 30,000 
Disasters and crises________________________ 55,000 
Health and wellbeing_______________________ 40,000 
Migration and displacement_______________ 40,000 
Values, power and inclusion_______________ 20,000 
Enabling functions_________________________ 50,000 
People to be reached
Climate and environment________________________________________________________________________________1,500 
Disasters and crises______________________________________________________________________________________2,500 
Health and wellbeing_____________________________________________________________________________________1,500 
Migration and displacement_____________________________________________________________________________1,000 
Values, power and inclusion_______________________________________________________________________________500 
2024 Key priorities and actions • Inspire and mobilize young people to implement climate change actions within the country. • Boost National Society efforts to build emergency preparedness capacities.
 • Develop a WASH strategy and framework to address non-communicable diseases. • Strengthen National Society capacities to support migrants in a context where Guyana is both a country of origin and destination. • Support and inspire young people through inclusive humanitarian education and workplace activities.

[Page 136]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
HONDURAS 
In support of Honduran Red Cross
National Society staff___________________________491 
National Society volunteers_________________ 6,005 
National Society branches______________________ 53 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DHN001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment_______________ 1,267,087 
Disasters and crises_____________________2,970,413 
Health and wellbeing____________________3,727,066 
Migration and displacement____________ 3,201,121 
Values, power and inclusion____________1,005,637 
Enabling functions_____________________ 3,220,453 
People to be reached
Climate and environment________________________________________________________________________________6,842 
Disasters and crises___________________________________________________________________________________ 371,449 
Health and wellbeing___________________________________________________________________________________ 89,560 
Migration and displacement__________________________________________________________________________ 173,476 
Values, power and inclusion____________________________________________________________________________81,095 
2024 Key priorities and actions • Carry out an inventory of emissions from fossil fuel, electricity and solid waste to quantify or measure the institutional contribution, which will become baseline for action.
 • Provide resources and technical support to improve food production and diversify sources of income.
 • Strengthen capacities of the National Emergency Operations Centre and local Emergency Operations 
Centres.
 • New national coordinators will strengthen programmes in community health, mental health, emergency health and pre-hospital services.
Participating National Societies
American Red Cross, German Red Cross, Italian Red Cross, Norwegian Red Cross, Spanish Red Cross, 
Swiss Red Cross, The Canadian Red Cross Society

[Page 137]
IFRC network country information
JAMAICA 
In support of Jamaica Red Cross
National Society staff____________________________ 26 
National Society volunteers_________________ 9,500 
National Society branches______________________ 13 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DJM001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment________________ 200,000 
Disasters and crises_______________________140,000 
Health and wellbeing______________________195,000 
Migration and displacement______________150,000 
Values, power and inclusion_______________ 70,000 
Enabling functions_______________________ 400,000 
People to be reached
Climate and environment________________________________________________________________________________5,000 
Disasters and crises______________________________________________________________________________________4,000 
Health and wellbeing_____________________________________________________________________________________2,000 
Migration and displacement_______________________________________________________________________________800 
Values, power and inclusion_______________________________________________________________________________450 
2024 Key priorities and actions • Ensure training of staff and volunteers in climate and environment activities and develop/update climate-related plans and strategies. • Build the capacities of Jamaica Red Cross staff and volunteers in the areas of logistics and warehousing. • Provide support to National Society plans to upskill and mobilize community-based health volunteers. • Enhance existing mechanisms to support migrants and host communities. • Support the National Society’s work to ensure programmes and operations are fully inclusive and explore enhanced Community Engagement and Accountability.

[Page 138]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
PANAMA
In support of Red Cross Society of Panama
National Society staff____________________________ 89 
National Society volunteers__________________1,716 
National Society branches______________________ 23 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DPA001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment_________________130,000 
Disasters and crises_______________________449,275 
Health and wellbeing_____________________ 633,800 
Migration and displacement____________3,129,804 
Values, power and inclusion______________145,000 
Enabling functions________________________499,000 
People to be reached
Climate and environment________________________________________________________________________________1,000 
Disasters and crises______________________________________________________________________________________4,000 
Health and wellbeing__________________________________________________________________________________ 100,000 
Migration and displacement__________________________________________________________________________200,000 
Values, power and inclusion_____________________________________________________________________________2,000 
Ongoing emergency appeals and DREF 
MDRPA018 DREF, Civil Unrest
2024 Key priorities and actions • Raise awareness of climate change through community education projects. Beach clean-ups, reforestation days, promotion of renewable energy and proper waste management.
 • Develop protocols and contingency plans for emergencies and protocols for Emergency Operations 
Centres.
 • Provision of primary care, promotion of disease prevention and response to health needs in emergencies.
 • Ensure at least one community engagement and accountability feedback mechanism in each IFRC 
Humanitarian Service Point. 
Participating National Societies
Italian Red Cross, Spanish Red Cross

[Page 139]
IFRC network country information
PARAGUAY
In support of Paraguayan Red Cross
National Society staff____________________________ 35 
National Society volunteers__________________1,438 
National Society branches______________________ 21 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DPY001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment_________________150,000 
Disasters and crises_______________________150,000 
Health and wellbeing___________________ 2,000,000 
Migration and displacement_______________ 50,000 
Values, power and inclusion______________125,000 
Enabling functions_____________________ 3,935,500 
People to be reached
Climate and environment________________________________________________________________________________3,000 
Disasters and crises______________________________________________________________________________________3,500 
Health and wellbeing___________________________________________________________________________________ 10,000 
Migration and displacement_______________________________________________________________________________500 
Values, power and inclusion_______________________________________________________________________________500 
2024 Key priorities and actions • Enhance the impact of health, youth, social inclusion and disaster-risk management programmes through efficient and effective management.
 • Develop a sustainable organizational culture with a view to institutionally strengthening the Paraguayan 
Red Cross.
 • Strengthen the institutional identity to generate a national positioning of reference for the actions of the members of the Paraguayan Red Cross.
 • Generate and implement financial sustainability strategies at three levels: local, national and the Reina 
Sofía Maternal and Children’s Hospital.
Participating National Societies
Italian Red Cross, Swiss Red Cross

[Page 140]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
SAINT KITTS AND NEVIS
In support of Saint Kitts and 
Nevis Red Cross Society
National Society staff_____________________________ 6 
National Society volunteers___________________ 153 
National Society branches_______________________ 2 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DKN001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment________________ 160,000 
Disasters and crises______________________ 175,000 
Health and wellbeing______________________ 10,000 
Migration and displacement______________ 10,000 
Enabling functions________________________ 20,000 
People to be reached
Climate and environment_________________________________________________________________________________ 200 
Disasters and crises_______________________________________________________________________________________ 500 
Health and wellbeing______________________________________________________________________________________ 300 
Migration and displacement________________________________________________________________________________ 50 
2024 Key priorities and actions • Support National Society involvement in Green Response and its work in recycling drives, beach cleanups and tree-planting projects. • Prioritize increased engagement of volunteers in Disaster-risk reduction, Preparedness for Effective 
Response, and Enhanced Vulnerability and Capacity Assessments. • Strengthen National Society efforts related to health in emergencies and enhancing public health institutional frameworks. • Provide training and support to the National Society in migration and displacement, including policy development. • Support National Society work to increase diversity in volunteer recruitment, and to prioritize safety and insurance for volunteers.

[Page 141]
IFRC network country information
SAINT LUCIA
In support of Saint Lucia Red Cross
National Society staff_____________________________ 6 
National Society volunteers____________________280 
National Society branches________________________1 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DLC001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment_________________180,000 
Disasters and crises_______________________195,000 
Health and wellbeing_______________________ 27,000 
Migration and displacement________________ 9,000 
Values, power and inclusion________________ 3,000 
Enabling functions_________________________ 11,000 
People to be reached
Climate and environment__________________________________________________________________________________500 
Disasters and crises______________________________________________________________________________________1,500 
Health and wellbeing_____________________________________________________________________________________1,000 
Migration and displacement_______________________________________________________________________________500 
Values, power and inclusion________________________________________________________________________________ 25 
2024 Key priorities and actions • Increase the capacity of staff and volunteers to understand the importance of climate change in a humanitarian context. • Build disaster management capacities in logistics and warehousing and provide Community Disaster 
Response Team Training of Trainers.
 • Identify, plan and implement actions designed to promote health-seeking behaviour and risk-reduction initiatives. • Provide support to National Society work in line with Migration Plan of Action for the Americas. • Train volunteers and staff in the Dignity, Access, Participation and Safety approach, including prevention of sexual- and gender-based violence in emergencies.

[Page 142]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
SAINT VINCENT AND THE GRENADINES
In support of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Red Cross
National Society staff____________________________ 13 
National Society volunteers_____________________ 94 
National Society branches________________________1 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DVC001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment________________ 240,300 
Disasters and crises_______________________311,000 
Health and wellbeing_______________________ 35,000 
Values, power and inclusion_______________ 14,000 
People to be reached
Climate and environment________________________________________________________________________________1,000 
Disasters and crises______________________________________________________________________________________1,000 
Health and wellbeing_____________________________________________________________________________________1,000 
2024 Key priorities and actions • Support National Society efforts to green its operations and responses and build community resilience. • Build local capacities by supporting the formation of Community Disaster Response Teams and the delivery of Enhanced Vulnerability and Capacity Assessments.
 • Strengthen community-based first aid services, and support National Society work with national authorities to integrate mental health and substance abuse prevention in primary health care. • Increase National Society involvement in regional and international groups and forums on migration and displacement. • Support the training and capacity-building needs of staff and volunteers, and the adoption of a 
Protection, Gender, and Inclusion approach. 
Participating National Societies
French Red Cross

[Page 143]
IFRC network country information
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
In support of The Trinidad and 
Tobago Red Cross Society
National Society staff____________________________ 37 
National Society volunteers____________________637 
National Society branches_______________________ 3 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DTT001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment__________________ 85,000 
Disasters and crises_______________________155,000 
Health and wellbeing_______________________ 80,000 
Migration and displacement______________100,000 
Values, power and inclusion_______________ 30,000 
Enabling functions_________________________ 85,000 
People to be reached
Climate and environment__________________________________________________________________________________500 
Disasters and crises____________________________________________________________________________________ 20,000 
Health and wellbeing_____________________________________________________________________________________5,000 
Migration and displacement_____________________________________________________________________________2,000 
Values, power and inclusion_____________________________________________________________________________2,000 
2024 Key priorities and actions • Implement nature-based solutions policy and encourage youth mobilization for climate. • Build disaster management capacities across the National Society through the provision of training and guidance.
 • Continue roll-out of the 2022-2026 Safeguarding Society through the Mind and Body health initiative. • Build the resilience of the migrant population while creating opportunities for self-sufficiency.
 • Prioritize initiatives to prevent violence, discrimination and exclusion of marginalized groups, including those at risk of identity-based violence.

[Page 144]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
URUGUAY 
In support of Uruguayan Red Cross
National Society staff____________________________ 55 
National Society volunteers____________________292 
National Society branches______________________ 14 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DUY001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment_________________100,000 
Disasters and crises______________________ 200,000 
Health and wellbeing_____________________ 200,000 
Migration and displacement_______________ 50,000 
Values, power and inclusion_______________ 20,000 
Enabling functions________________________828,554 
People to be reached
Climate and environment________________________________________________________________________________5,000 
Disasters and crises______________________________________________________________________________________4,500 
Health and wellbeing_____________________________________________________________________________________5,000 
Migration and displacement_____________________________________________________________________________3,000 
Values, power and inclusion_____________________________________________________________________________1,500 
2024 Key priorities and actions • Risk Management and Disaster Response.
 • Communication.
 • Resource Mobilization and Development.
 • Volunteering.
 • Comprehensive Training Centre that provides training services in areas such as first aid, water rescue and nursing.
Participating National Societies
Italian Red Cross, Spanish Red Cross, The Canadian Red Cross Society

[Page 145]
IFRC network country information
Afghanistan
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
Bangladesh
New Delhi
Myanmar
Bangkok
Philippines
Malaysia
Jakarta
Suva
Papua New Guinea
Beijing
Pakistan
Sri Lanka
Nepal
ASIA PACIFIC
IFRC DELEGATIONS

[Page 146]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
AFGHANISTAN
In support of Afghan Red Crescent
National Society staff________________________ 3,909 
National Society volunteers________________ 24,056 
National Society branches_____________________122 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DAF001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment______________ 6,000,000 
Disasters and crises____________________ 9,000,000 
Health and wellbeing__________________ 15,647,540 
Migration and displacement___________ 3,000,000 
Values, power and inclusion___________ 3,000,000 
Enabling functions_____________________ 5,000,000 
People to be reached
Climate and environment_____________________________________________________________________________400,000 
Disasters and crises_________________________________________________________________________________1,000,000 
Health and wellbeing________________________________________________________________________________2,000,000 
Migration and displacement__________________________________________________________________________ 100,000 
Values, power and inclusion__________________________________________________________________________500,000 
Ongoing emergency appeals and DREF
MDRAF007 Emergency Appeal, Complex Emergency
2024 Key priorities and actions • Youth development.
 • Disaster-risk management.
 • Community-based health and first aid.
 • Restoring family links.
 • Community resilience – including WASH and livelihoods. Dissemination of international humanitarian law.
 • Physical rehabilitation for internally displaced persons with physical disabilities. 
Participating National Societies
Albanian Red Cross, Austrian Red Cross, Bahrain Red Crescent Society, British Red Cross, Danish Red 
Cross, Finnish Red Cross, German Red Cross, Irish Red Cross Society, Italian Red Cross, Japanese Red 
Cross Society, Kuwait Red Crescent Society, New Zealand Red Cross, Norwegian Red Cross, Philippine 
Red Cross, Red Cross Society of China, Red Cross of Monaco, Singapore Red Cross, Slovenian Red Cross, 
Swedish Red Cross, The Canadian Red Cross Society, The Netherlands Red Cross, The Republic of Korea 
National Red Cross, Turkish Red Crescent Society

[Page 147]
IFRC network country information
BANGLADESH
In support of 
National Society staff_________________________2,757 
National Society volunteers_______________122,559 
National Society branches______________________ 68 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DBD001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment_______________7,905,000
Disasters and crises___________________ 14,480,000
Health and wellbeing___________________18,740,100
Migration and displacement____________ 4,113,750
Values, power and inclusion___________ 1,266,000
Enabling functions_____________________23,187,650
People to be reached
Climate and environment___________________________________________________________________________1,320,300 
Disasters and crises_________________________________________________________________________________ 2,611,052 
Health and wellbeing________________________________________________________________________________ 1,597,560 
Migration and displacement________________________________________________________________________ 1,004,017 
Values, power and inclusion__________________________________________________________________________430,322 
Ongoing emergency appeals and DREF
MDRBD018 Emergency Appeal, Population Movement; MDRBD032 DREF, Heat Wave
2024 Key priorities and actions • Continue to respond to the population movement operation in Cox’s Bazar.
 • Use an integrated approach to ensure that programming is climate-smart and responds to the growing challenge of climate change.
 • Strengthen flood and cyclone preparedness with strong focus on anticipatory action. Invest in earthquake preparedness.
 • Expand maternal, new-born and child health services; improve capacity to provide mental health and psychosocial support; and improve health promotion and disease prevention strategies.
 • Humanitarian response and assistance for migrants and internally Displaced Persons (including health, psychosocial support, safe referrals, food and non-food items, shelter, cash and voucher assistance, livelihoods and education).
Participating National Societies
American Red Cross, British Red Cross, Danish Red Cross, German Red Cross, Japanese Red Cross 
Society, Qatar Red Crescent, Swedish Red Cross, Swiss Red Cross, Turkish Red Crescent

[Page 148]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
BRUNEI
In support of Brunei Darussalam 
Red Crescent Society
National Society staff______________________________1 
National Society volunteers_________________ 1,000 
National Society branches_______________________ 4 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DBN001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment__________________ 15,000 
Disasters and crises________________________ 25,000 
Health and wellbeing_______________________ 35,000 
Values, power and inclusion_______________ 15,000 
Enabling functions________________________255,000 
People to be reached
Climate and environment________________________________________________________________________________1,000 
Disasters and crises______________________________________________________________________________________1,000 
Health and wellbeing_____________________________________________________________________________________9,500 
Values, power and inclusion_____________________________________________________________________________1,000 
2024 Key priorities and actions • Adaptation of the National Society’s constitution consisting of drafting, consultation with IFRC and ICRC, and registering the constitution by law. • Strengthen the fundraising workgroup to source, develop and coordinate fundraising initiatives, and facilitate/arrange fundraising activities.
 • Strengthen the Youth Governing Board, further develop the youth cadet programme, and sustainable volunteering programmes.
 • Key thematic domains include first aid, school safe programme, advocating for road-safety and climate- change awareness.

[Page 149]
IFRC network country information
CAMBODIA
In support of Cambodian Red Cross Society
National Society staff___________________________358 
National Society volunteers________________ 53,314 
National Society branches___________________1,881 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DKH001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Health and wellbeing_______________________ 10,000 
Migration and displacement_______________ 10,000
Values, power and inclusion_______________ 52,000 
People to be reached
Health and wellbeing___________________________________________________________________________________ 10,000 
Migration and displacement___________________________________________________________________________ 10,000 
Values, power and inclusion___________________________________________________________________________ 52,000 
2024 Key priorities and actions • Assess the carbon footprint of services and programmes, and propose options to reduce or offset them. • Support Cambodian Red Cross with an important migration and displacement assessment conducted in Cambodia.
 • Develop a commercial first aid sustainable system and a mental health and psychosocial support framework.
 • Provide assistance in border areas through HIV/AIDS awareness interventions targeting migrant workers in partnership with Lao Red Cross.

[Page 150]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
INDIA
In support of Indian Red Cross Society
National Society staff________________________ 2,296 
National Society volunteers_____________ 4,010,811 
National Society branches___________________1,247 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DIN001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment_________________150,000 
Disasters and crises_____________________2,331,100 
Health and wellbeing______________________150,000 
Values, power and inclusion_______________ 50,000 
Enabling functions________________________ 421,150 
People to be reached
Climate and environment______________________________________________________________________________ 50,000 
Disasters and crises___________________________________________________________________________________ 100,000 
Health and wellbeing__________________________________________________________________________________ 100,000 
Values, power and inclusion___________________________________________________________________________ 50,000 
Ongoing emergency appeals and DREF
MDRIN028 DREF, Flood
2024 Key priorities and actions • The Indian Red Cross Society is working on climate change by supporting early warning systems, forecast-based financing and nature-based solutions.
 • Train community volunteers who can provide essential services during a disaster and preposition essential stocks of humanitarian assistance.
 • Continue first aid and blood services while increasing capacity in communicable and non-communicable diseases, pandemics and climate change-induced health needs.
 • Continue to strengthen youth engagement activities such as leadership training, Youth as Agents of 
Behavioural Change, Climate Action Y-Adapt training, youth seminars, youth camps.
Participating National Societies
The Canadian Red Cross Society

[Page 151]
IFRC network country information
INDONESIA
In support of Indonesian Red Cross Society
National Society staff________________________ 6,658 
National Society volunteers_______________ 316,617 
National Society branches_____________________528 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DID001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment________________ 424,000 
Disasters and crises_______________________877,000 
Health and wellbeing___________________ 1,000,000 
Values, power and inclusion______________339,000 
Enabling functions_____________________ 1,400,000 
People to be reached
Climate and environment______________________________________________________________________________ 79,000 
Disasters and crises___________________________________________________________________________________ 102,000 
Health and wellbeing__________________________________________________________________________________ 145,400 
Migration and displacement_______________________________________________________________________________300 
Values, power and inclusion__________________________________________________________________________ 121,000 
Ongoing emergency appeals and DREF
MDRID026 DREF, Drought
2024 Key priorities and actions • Cash and voucher assistance.
 • WASH.
 • Shelter.
 • First aid, ambulance services, blood supply, and dead body management.
 • Restoring Family Links. • Sexual Gender-Based Violence support.
 • Community Engagement and Accountability.
 • Community-Based Surveillance.
Participating National Societies
American Red Cross, Australian Red Cross, British Red Cross, Japanese Red Cross Society, Qatar Red 
Crescent Society

[Page 152]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
LAOS
In support of Lao Red Cross
National Society staff___________________________488 
National Society volunteers__________________1,055 
National Society branches______________________ 74 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DLA001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment_______________________ 10 
Disasters and crises_______________________300,100 
Health and wellbeing_______________________ 70,000 
Migration and displacement_______________ 10,000 
Values, power and inclusion______________100,000 
Enabling functions_________________________ 27,000 
People to be reached
Climate and environment______________________________________________________________________________ 50,000 
Disasters and crises___________________________________________________________________________________550,000 
Health and wellbeing_____________________________________________________________________________________4,000 
Migration and displacement_____________________________________________________________________________2,500 
Values, power and inclusion__________________________________________________________________________ 207,100 
Ongoing emergency appeals and DREF
MDRLA009, DREF, Flood
2024 Key priorities and actions • Create a training module focused on climate-smart Enhanced Vulnerability and Capacity Assessment, providing training for staff at headquarters and branches. • Develop and implement a Preparedness for Effective Response workplan.
 • Expand role and effectiveness of first aid and Health Promotion Volunteers. • Provide assistance in border areas through HIV/AIDS awareness interventions targeting migrant workers, in partnership with Cambodian Red Cross.
Participating National Societies
Swiss Red Cross, The Thai Red Cross Society

[Page 153]
IFRC network country information
MALAYSIA
In support of Malaysian 
Red Crescent Society
National Society staff____________________________ 78 
National Society volunteers________________ 75,807 
National Society branches_____________________159 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DMY001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment________________ 500,000 
Disasters and crises______________________ 952,000 
Health and wellbeing___________________ 1,800,000 
Migration and displacement______________250,000 
Values, power and inclusion_____________ 200,000 
Enabling functions________________________700,000 
People to be reached
Climate and environment______________________________________________________________________________ 15,000 
Disasters and crises____________________________________________________________________________________ 50,000 
Health and wellbeing___________________________________________________________________________________ 50,000 
Migration and displacement___________________________________________________________________________ 25,000 
Values, power and inclusion___________________________________________________________________________ 25,000 
2024 Key priorities and actions • Preposition MRCS into climate and environment crisis works in Malaysia through development of partnerships with relevant ministries.
 • Increase preparedness activities for community resilience and early warning early action/anticipatory action.
 • Strengthen ambulance services and first aid services and training.
 • Advocate in support of migrants’ and displaced persons’ access to essential public services. • Scale up technical and financial support for youth-led education and action.
Participating National Societies
Italian Red Cross

[Page 154]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
MYANMAR
In support of Myanmar Red Cross Society
National Society staff___________________________635 
National Society volunteers________________ 23,842 
National Society branches_____________________330 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DMM001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment______________ 2,400,000 
Disasters and crises____________________ 3,645,000 
Health and wellbeing____________________ 7,899,211 
Migration and displacement___________ 1,000,000 
Values, power and inclusion_____________ 600,000 
Enabling functions______________________ 8,106,792 
People to be reached
Climate and environment_____________________________________________________________________________600,000 
Disasters and crises___________________________________________________________________________________200,000 
Health and wellbeing__________________________________________________________________________________400,000 
Migration and displacement___________________________________________________________________________ 10,000 
Values, power and inclusion_____________________________________________________________________________5,000 
Ongoing emergency appeals and DREF
MDRMM019 DREF, Flood; MDRMM018 Emergency Appeal, Cyclone
2024 Key priorities and actions • Continue response to cyclone Mocha.
 • Increase capacities to implement Early Actions nationwide, based on local capacities in place and impact forecast. Creation of environmental conservation policy, strategy, framework and advocacy.
 • Expand community and school-based disaster-risk reduction. Create a Food Security and Livelihoods policy. • Expand and strengthen primary and emergency health care services. • Create and support at least one Humanitarian Service Point.
Participating National Societies
Australian Red Cross, British Red Cross, Danish Red Cross, Finnish Red Cross, German Red Cross, Italian 
Red Cross, Japanese Red Cross Society, Norwegian Red Cross, Swedish Red Cross

[Page 155]
IFRC network country information
NEPAL
In support of Nepal Red Cross Society
National Society staff___________________________321 
National Society volunteers_______________146,524 
National Society branches__________________ 8,244 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DNP001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment_______________1,821,837 
Disasters and crises_____________________3,992,259 
Health and wellbeing____________________4,252,758 
Migration and displacement______________189,500 
Values, power and inclusion______________214,000 
Enabling functions______________________ 1,577,105 
People to be reached
Climate and environment_____________________________________________________________________________400,000 
Disasters and crises___________________________________________________________________________________200,000 
Health and wellbeing__________________________________________________________________________________600,000 
Migration and displacement___________________________________________________________________________ 20,000 
Values, power and inclusion__________________________________________________________________________ 120,000 
Ongoing emergency appeals and DREF
MDRNP016 DREF, Earthquake; MDRNP015 DREF, Earthquake
2024 Key priorities and actions • Climate-change adaptation related to heatwaves, nature-based solutions, anticipatory action, and early warning. Integrate climate-change mitigation across all programmes and services.
 • Continue disaster-risk reduction/resilience projects in 17 districts and expand similar projects in additional three districts.
 • Blood services, first aid, eye care and ambulance services as a part of pre-hospital care.
 • Continue the restoring family link initiatives and redefine national-level strategies and plans in relation to migration and displacement through a refreshed understanding of needs. • Formalize community engagement and accountability policy and CEA mainstreaming guidelines to incorporate CEA approaches into all services and initiatives.
Participating National Societies
American Red Cross, British Red Cross, Danish Red Cross, Finnish Red Cross, Irish Red Cross Society, 
Italian Red Cross, Luxembourg Red Cross, Qatar Red Crescent Society, Swiss Red Cross, The Canadian 
Red Cross Society, The Republic of Korea National Red Cross

[Page 156]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
PAKISTAN
In support of Pakistan Red Crescent
National Society staff___________________________692 
National Society volunteers_________________ 5,000 
National Society branches______________________ 60 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DPK001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment_________________886,667 
Disasters and crises_____________________ 6,401,167 
Health and wellbeing___________________ 3,055,000 
Migration and displacement______________ 733,127 
Values, power and inclusion______________ 841,743 
Enabling functions________________________863,910 
People to be reached
Climate and environment_______________________________________________________________________________37,990 
Disasters and crises___________________________________________________________________________________ 148,926 
Health and wellbeing__________________________________________________________________________________ 241,400 
Migration and displacement___________________________________________________________________________ 75,920 
Values, power and inclusion____________________________________________________________________________47,000 
Ongoing emergency appeals and DREF
MDRPK024 DREF, Flood
2024 Key priorities and actions • Prioritize internal capacity building to be better prepared to respond to climate change. • Provide training in disaster response, disaster-risk reduction, cash and voucher assistance, forecast based financing/anticipatory action and other relevant skills. • Reduce maternal and child mortality, improve access to WASH, preventing and controlling communicable diseases and promoting healthy living.
 • Develop a migration and displacement policy with a clear road map to respond to the humanitarian needs of migrants and displaced people in Pakistan.
 • Include disaster-risk reduction in school curriculums and extra-curricular activities, enabling schools to be prepared and act effectively on saving lives in an emergency.
Participating National Societies
British Red Cross, German Red Cross, Italian Red Cross, Norwegian Red Cross, Turkish Red Crescent

[Page 157]
IFRC network country information
PHILIPPINES
In support of Philippine Red Cross
National Society staff_________________________1,923 
National Society volunteers_______________124,556 
National Society branches_____________________102 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DPH001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment_______________1,404,495 
Disasters and crises_____________________2,298,747 
Health and wellbeing____________________ 3,274,781 
Migration and displacement______________250,000 
Values, power and inclusion______________577,832 
Enabling functions______________________2,228,727 
People to be reached
Climate and environment_____________________________________________________________________________400,000 
Disasters and crises___________________________________________________________________________________380,000 
Health and wellbeing__________________________________________________________________________________ 100,000 
Migration and displacement___________________________________________________________________________ 35,000 
Values, power and inclusion__________________________________________________________________________ 370,000 
Ongoing emergency appeals and DREF
MDRPH052 DREF, Cyclone
2024 Key priorities and actions • Blood services.
 • Disaster management and relief services.
 • Dissemination of international humanitarian law.
 • Health services.
 • Safety services.
 • Social services.
 • Volunteering.
 • Youth.
Participating National Societies
American Red Cross, Finnish Red Cross, German Red Cross, Spanish Red Cross, The Canadian Red Cross 
Society, The Netherlands Red Cross

[Page 158]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
SRI LANKA
In support of Sri Lanka Red Cross Society
National Society staff___________________________197 
National Society volunteers____________________831 
National Society branches______________________ 25 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DLK001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment_________________100,000 
Disasters and crises______________________ 354,500 
Health and wellbeing______________________100,000 
Migration and displacement_______________ 52,570 
Values, power and inclusion_______________ 48,606 
Enabling functions_________________________ 40,000 
People to be reached
Climate and environment______________________________________________________________________________ 75,000 
Disasters and crises___________________________________________________________________________________500,000 
Health and wellbeing__________________________________________________________________________________ 100,000 
Migration and displacement___________________________________________________________________________ 15,000 
Values, power and inclusion___________________________________________________________________________ 30,000 
Ongoing emergency appeals and DREF
MDRLK018 DREF, Flood
2024 Key priorities and actions • Disaster-risk reduction.
 • Climate-change adaptation. • Non-communicable diseases. • Dengue.
 • First aid.
 • Healthy ageing.

[Page 159]
IFRC network country information
THAILAND
In support of The Thai Red Cross Society
National Society staff_______________________ 11,252 
National Society volunteers________________ 51,208 
National Society branches_____________________392 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DTH001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment________________ 450,000 
Disasters and crises_______________________175,000 
Health and wellbeing______________________275,000 
Migration and displacement_______________ 70,000 
Values, power and inclusion_______________ 32,800 
People to be reached
Climate and environment_____________________________________________________________________________850,000 
Disasters and crises___________________________________________________________________________________250,000 
Health and wellbeing__________________________________________________________________________________600,000 
Migration and displacement___________________________________________________________________________ 10,000 
Values, power and inclusion____________________________________________________________________________17,000 
2024 Key priorities and actions • Train staff, youth volunteers and community-based youth, focusing on climate change.
 • Map disaster-related laws, policies and regulations related to the National Society’s auxiliary role. • Enhance online first aid training programme, and equip dedicated first aid training centres and health stations.
 • Scale up assistance to people without identification documents in obtaining immunization vaccine.
 • Create a youth engagement policy and guideline, as well as a youth development plan.

[Page 160]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
TIMOR-LESTE
In support of Timor-Leste 
Red Cross Society
National Society staff___________________________134 
National Society volunteers____________________792 
National Society branches______________________ 14 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DTL001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment__________________ 33,000 
Disasters and crises_______________________655,423 
Health and wellbeing_______________________ 51,258 
Values, power and inclusion_______________ 35,316 
Enabling functions________________________453,415 
People to be reached
Climate and environment________________________________________________________________________________ 7,000 
Disasters and crises______________________________________________________________________________________ 7,000 
Health and wellbeing_____________________________________________________________________________________4,900 
Migration and displacement_________________________________________________________________________________31 
Values, power and inclusion_____________________________________________________________________________1,800 
2024 Key priorities and actions • Integrated community-based risk reduction for health, livelihoods, environmental protection, food security and nutrition, water and sanitation, and disaster management. • Cash and voucher assistance.
 • Enhance early warning system and anticipatory actions.
 • Strengthen youth clubs at municipal level.
Participating National Societies
American Red Cross, Australian Red Cross, Indonesian Red Cross Society, Italian Red Cross, New Zealand 
Red Cross, The Netherlands Red Cross, The Republic of Korea National Red Cross

[Page 161]
IFRC network country information
VIETNAM
In support of Vietnam Red Cross Society
National Society staff_______________________ 16,008 
National Society volunteers_______________421,220 
National Society branches_________________ 15,843 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DVN001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment_________________ 126,610 
Health and wellbeing______________________150,000 
Migration and displacement________________ 5,000 
Values, power and inclusion_______________22,000 
People to be reached
Climate and environment________________________________________________________________________________ 6,610 
Disasters and crises______________________________________________________________________________________1,400 
Health and wellbeing__________________________________________________________________________________ 119,249 
Migration and displacement_____________________________________________________________________________ 4,120 
Values, power and inclusion_____________________________________________________________________________4,260 
Ongoing emergency appeals and DREF
MDRVN023 DREF, Pluvial/Flash Flood; MDRVN022 DREF, Heat Wave
2024 Key priorities and actions • Evaluate the impact of the Greening DRR project’s first phase and use lessons to inform/adjust the objectives of the second phase.
 • Organize annual pre-disaster meetings with Red Cross branches and relevant partners in-country.
 • Disseminate revised WASH Framework, integrate disease awareness into school curriculums, and establish Red Cross first aid stations in accident-prone areas. • Engage youth leaders in the establishment of five Clean Kitchen points in disadvantaged schools to enhance educational quality. 
Participating National Societies
Swiss Red Cross, The Republic of Korea National Red Cross

[Page 162]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
Warsaw
Moscow
Bishkek
Tbilisi
Sarajevo
Türkiye
EUROPE
IFRC DELEGATIONS

[Page 163]
IFRC network country information
ALBANIA
In support of Albanian Red Cross
National Society staff____________________________ 62 
National Society volunteers_________________ 2,225 
National Society branches______________________ 39 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DAL001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment________________ 200,000 
Disasters and crises______________________ 300,000 
Health and wellbeing_____________________ 802,000 
Migration and displacement_______________ 50,000 
Values, power and inclusion______________150,000 
Enabling functions______________________ 1,017,500 
People to be reached
Climate and environment______________________________________________________________________________ 60,230 
Disasters and crises_____________________________________________________________________________________15,760 
Health and wellbeing__________________________________________________________________________________ 130,030 
Migration and displacement_______________________________________________________________________________ 520 
Values, power and inclusion__________________________________________________________________________ 126,100 
2024 Key priorities and actions • Disaster preparedness response and first aid programme.
 • Social welfare programme.
 • Health programme for maternal and child health, reproductive health, personal and community hygiene, the prevention of infectious diseases and non-communicable diseases, promotion of voluntary blood donation, and prevention of epidemic and pandemics.
 • Youth and humanitarian education programme.
 • Organizational development programme to review and update the legal and policy framework.
Participating National Societies
Austrian Red Cross, Italian Red Cross

[Page 164]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
BELARUS
In support of Belarus Red Cross
National Society staff___________________________418 
National Society volunteers________________ 15,325 
National Society branches_____________________158 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DBY001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment________________ 300,000 
Disasters and crises_______________________125,000 
Health and wellbeing___________________ 1,328,060 
Migration and displacement_____________ 336,000 
Values, power and inclusion______________920,000 
Enabling functions________________________150,000 
People to be reached
Climate and environment__________________________________________________________________________________200 
Disasters and crises________________________________________________________________________________________500 
Health and wellbeing___________________________________________________________________________________ 10,000 
Migration and displacement_____________________________________________________________________________5,000 
Values, power and inclusion_____________________________________________________________________________2,000 
Ongoing emergency appeals and DREF
MGR65002 Emergency Appeal, Part of Ukraine and impacted countries crisis
2024 Key priorities and actions • Disseminate knowledge about International Humanitarian Law, and the International Red Cross and 
Red Crescent Movement. • Medical and social care.
 • Emergency and crisis preparedness and response. • Volunteer development.
 • Organizational development.

[Page 165]
IFRC network country information
BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
In support of The Red Cross Society of Bosnia and Herzegovina
National Society staff___________________________335 
National Society volunteers_________________ 9,824 
National Society branches_____________________165 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DBA001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment_________________100,000 
Disasters and crises______________________ 469,440 
Health and wellbeing_____________________ 230,000 
Migration and displacement______________250,000 
Values, power and inclusion______________100,000 
People to be reached
Climate and environment______________________________________________________________________________ 40,000 
Disasters and crises____________________________________________________________________________________ 45,000 
Health and wellbeing___________________________________________________________________________________ 70,000 
Migration and displacement___________________________________________________________________________ 30,000 
Values, power and inclusion___________________________________________________________________________ 10,000 
2024 Key priorities and actions • Anticipatory action to be able to respond to heatwaves and cold waves.
 • Scale up use of X-stock platform through countries in Central and South-Eastern Europe.
 • Standardize first aid training, provide home-based care services for disabled and older people.
 • Strengthen mental health and psychosocial support capacities.
 • Strengthen information management for evidence-based humanitarian diplomacy.
Participating National Societies
Austrian Red Cross, Danish Red Cross, German Red Cross, Italian Red Cross, Swiss Red Cross, The 
Canadian Red Cross Society, Turkish Red Crescent Society

[Page 166]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
BULGARIA
In support of Bulgarian Red Cross
National Society staff___________________________501 
National Society volunteers________________ 16,367 
National Society branches______________________ 35 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DBG001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment______________ 1,250,000 
Disasters and crises____________________ 3,500,000 
Health and wellbeing___________________ 3,700,000 
Migration and displacement___________ 3,000,000 
Values, power and inclusion____________1,150,000 
Enabling functions_______________________ 400,000 
People to be reached
Climate and environment________________________________________________________________________________2,500 
Disasters and crises____________________________________________________________________________________ 15,000 
Health and wellbeing_____________________________________________________________________________________5,000 
Migration and displacement___________________________________________________________________________ 20,000 
Values, power and inclusion___________________________________________________________________________ 10,000 
Ongoing emergency appeals and DREF
MGR65002 Emergency Appeal, Part of Ukraine and impacted countries crisis
2024 Key priorities and actions • First aid training.
 • Disaster relief and humanitarian aid.
 • Mountain and water rescue.
 • Social and health care.
 • Youth and child education.
Participating National Societies
Swiss Red Cross

[Page 167]
IFRC network country information
CROATIA
In support of Croatian Red Cross
National Society staff_________________________1,088 
National Society volunteers_________________ 6,933 
National Society branches_____________________ 131 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DHR001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment_________________250,000 
Disasters and crises______________________ 500,000 
Health and wellbeing______________________260,000 
Migration and displacement_____________ 200,000 
Values, power and inclusion______________270,000 
People to be reached
Climate and environment________________________________________________________________________________2,000 
Disasters and crises____________________________________________________________________________________ 10,000 
Health and wellbeing_____________________________________________________________________________________1,500 
Migration and displacement_____________________________________________________________________________5,000 
Values, power and inclusion___________________________________________________________________________ 10,000 
Ongoing emergency appeals and DREF
MGR65002 Emergency Appeal, Part of Ukraine and impacted countries crisis
2024 Key priorities and actions • Disaster preparedness, response and recovery. Health promotion, disease prevention, and community health initiatives.
 • First aid and training.
 • Youth and volunteer engagement.
 • Support to migrants, refugees and asylum seekers with humanitarian aid, psychosocial support, healthcare services and integration programmes.
 • Reduce social exclusion and provide support to marginalized individuals and communities.
 • Water lifesaving.
Participating National Societies
French Red Cross

[Page 168]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
MONTENEGRO
In support of Red Cross of Montenegro
National Society staff___________________________189 
National Society volunteers____________________910 
National Society branches______________________ 23 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DME001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment__________________ 75,795 
Disasters and crises_______________________529,527 
Health and wellbeing______________________329,352 
Migration and displacement____________1,900,650 
Values, power and inclusion______________816,547 
People to be reached
Climate and environment______________________________________________________________________________ 12,000 
Disasters and crises____________________________________________________________________________________ 60,000 
Health and wellbeing___________________________________________________________________________________ 10,000 
Migration and displacement_____________________________________________________________________________4,000 
Values, power and inclusion___________________________________________________________________________ 12,900 
Ongoing emergency appeals and DREF
MGR65006 Emergency Appeal, Part of Ukraine and impacted countries crisis
2024 Key priorities and actions • Disaster-risk reduction training and public awareness.
 • Training of response teams, procurement and provision of equipment, and provision of emergency stocks (reserves).
 • Increasing voluntary blood donation, first aid training, and training of volunteers on HIV/AIDS.
 • Provide integration, health care and psychosocial services for migrants.
 • Activities for inclusion of Roma and Egyptians in Montenegro, activities providing support for persons with disabilities, home visits through mobile teams for older persons.
Participating National Societies
Austrian Red Cross, Italian Red Cross, Swiss Red Cross

[Page 169]
IFRC network country information
NORTH MACEDONIA
In support of Red Cross of 
North Macedonia
National Society staff___________________________ 191 
National Society volunteers__________________3,978 
National Society branches______________________ 33 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DMK001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment_________________150,000 
Disasters and crises________________________ 50,000 
Health and wellbeing______________________592,000 
Migration and displacement______________100,000 
Values, power and inclusion_______________ 50,000 
Enabling functions_________________________ 50,000 
People to be reached
Climate and environment______________________________________________________________________________ 10,000 
Disasters and crises____________________________________________________________________________________ 15,000 
Health and wellbeing__________________________________________________________________________________ 110,000 
Migration and displacement___________________________________________________________________________ 25,000 
Values, power and inclusion___________________________________________________________________________ 20,000 
Ongoing emergency appeals and DREF
MGR65007 Emergency Appeal, Part of Ukraine and impacted countries crisis
2024 Key priorities and actions • Ensure that two million people are more resilient and better protected from heat and cold waves. • Establish a disaster preparedness and response centre with an operations centre.
 • Promote healthy lifestyles, first aid training, blood donation, and mental health and psychosocial support.
 • Provide first aid, psychosocial support, food, hygiene, water and medical supplies, restoring family links and ensuring access to health care services for migrants. • Preventive programmes to protect individuals at social risk, focusing on youth and addressing issues like human trafficking.
Participating National Societies
Austrian Red Cross, Italian Red Cross, Swiss Red Cross

[Page 170]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
ROMANIA
In support of Romanian Red Cross
National Society staff___________________________105 
National Society volunteers__________________8,928 
National Society branches______________________ 47 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DRO001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment__________________ 50,000 
Disasters and crises_____________________2,150,000 
Health and wellbeing____________________2,830,175 
Migration and displacement______________260,000 
Values, power and inclusion_____________ 360,000 
Enabling functions_____________________ 5,565,850 
People to be reached
Climate and environment______________________________________________________________________________ 10,000 
Disasters and crises____________________________________________________________________________________ 50,000 
Health and wellbeing___________________________________________________________________________________ 80,000 
Migration and displacement___________________________________________________________________________ 30,000 
Values, power and inclusion___________________________________________________________________________ 30,000 
Ongoing emergency appeals and DREF
MGR65009 Emergency Appeal, Part of Ukraine and impacted countries crisis
2024 Key priorities and actions • Ensure staff and volunteers have knowledge and capacity to take urgent action to adapt to the climate crisis.
 • Enhance coordination and collaboration on disaster preparedness and response with key stakeholders.
 • Develop a National Health Programme Framework.
 • Develop a migration and integration framework.
 • Strengthen capacity to implement community engagement and accountability approaches.
Participating National Societies
American Red Cross, British Red Cross, French Red Cross, Italian Red Cross, Swedish Red Cross

[Page 171]
IFRC network country information
RUSSIAN FEDERATION
In support of The Russian 
Red Cross Society
National Society staff__________________________ 840 
National Society volunteers_______________ 50,000 
National Society branches____________________ 600 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DRU001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment___________________ 7,500 
Disasters and crises____________________ 1,523,549 
Health and wellbeing___________________ 2,193,735 
Migration and displacement_____________ 745,000 
Values, power and inclusion_________ 38,281,000 
Enabling functions_______________________ 183,000 
People to be reached
Climate and environment______________________________________________________________________________ 16,000 
Disasters and crises____________________________________________________________________________________ 15,000 
Health and wellbeing_________________________________________________________________________________ 233,000 
Migration and displacement____________________________________________________________________________ 5,000 
Values, power and inclusion___________________________________________________________________________ 30,000 
Ongoing emergency appeals and DREF
MGR65010 Emergency Appeal, Part of Ukraine and impacted countries crisis
2024 Key priorities and actions • Social programmes with home-based, semi-patient and in-patient care for disabled people, the elderly with disabilities, and elderly people living alone that are unable to look after themselves. • Health programmes on HIV, TB and COVID-19. • First aid training. • Promotion of blood and bone marrow donation. • Disaster relief.

[Page 172]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
SERBIA
In support of The Red Cross of Serbia
National Society staff___________________________893 
National Society volunteers________________ 45,861 
National Society branches_____________________185 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DRS001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment__________________ 70,000 
Disasters and crises______________________ 200,000 
Health and wellbeing_____________________ 322,000 
Migration and displacement______________220,000 
Values, power and inclusion_______________ 50,000 
Enabling functions________________________170,000 
People to be reached
Climate and environment________________________________________________________________________________8,000 
Disasters and crises________________________________________________________________________________________ 100 
Health and wellbeing___________________________________________________________________________________ 32,000 
Migration and displacement_____________________________________________________________________________6,500 
Values, power and inclusion___________________________________________________________________________ 45,000 
2024 Key priorities and actions • Early warning systems, raising awareness of climate and environmental risks, and development of a forecast-based financing approach.
 • Renew technical and logistic capacity of the Red Cross of Serbia (fleet, warehouse, etc.).
 • Prevent non-communicable diseases, promote first aid and blood donation. • Engage migrants and host communities, raising awareness on risks faced by people on the move. 
Participating National Societies
Swiss Red Cross

[Page 173]
IFRC network country information
TÜRKIYE
In support of Turkish Red Crescent
National Society staff_______________________ 13,900
National Society volunteers_______________320,000 
National Society branches______________________ 81
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment______________ 2,000,000 
Disasters and crises___________________ 21,000,000 
Health and wellbeing____________________9,903,016 
Migration and displacement__________34,300,000 
Enabling functions____________________ 10,000,000 
People to be reached
Disasters and crises______________________________________________________________________________________1,280 
Health and wellbeing____________________________________________________________________________________19,614 
Migration and displacement_____________________________________________________________________________ 7,500 
Values, power and inclusion_____________________________________________________________________________1,280 
Ongoing emergency appeals and DREF
MGR65011 Emergency Appeal, Part of Ukraine and impacted countries crisis; MDRTR004 Emergency 
Appeal, Earthquake
2024 Key priorities and actions • Eliminating hunger and poverty in society.
 • Helping migrants.
 • Promoting healthy ageing.
 • Meeting blood needs sufficiently.
 • Developing resilience against natural hazards and human made disasters.
 • Creating a more viable environment with better access to education.
Participating National Societies
German Red Cross, Japanese Red Cross Society

[Page 174]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
Libya
Tunis
Beirut
Palestine
Jordan
Syrian Arab Republic
Yemen
Iran, Islamic Republic of
MIDDLE EAST & NORTH AFRICA
IFRC DELEGATIONS

[Page 175]
IFRC network country information
EGYPT
In support of Egyptian 
Red Crescent Society
National Society staff___________________________415 
National Society volunteers________________ 31,737 
National Society branches______________________ 38 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DEG001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment______________ 5,000,000 
Disasters and crises____________________ 1,000,000 
Health and wellbeing___________________ 5,000,000 
Migration and displacement___________ 5,000,000 
Values, power and inclusion_____________ 500,000 
Enabling functions_____________________ 1,600,000 
People to be reached
Climate and environment_____________________________________________________________________________ 150,000 
Disasters and crises___________________________________________________________________________________300,000 
Health and wellbeing__________________________________________________________________________________800,000 
Migration and displacement__________________________________________________________________________500,000 
Values, power and inclusion__________________________________________________________________________ 100,000 
Ongoing emergency appeals and DREF
MDRS5002 Emergency Appeal, Complex Emergency; MDREG020 Emergency Appeal, Population 
Movement
2024 Key priorities and actions • Address climate change through long-term projects that promote nature-based solutions, healthy ecosystems, safe communities, and economic opportunities across the country.
 • Support the National Society in forecast-based financing and in developing a Preparedness for Effective 
Response (PER) workplan • Develop protocols with Ministry of Health and population for nationwide immunization campaigns (including for polio and COVID-19).
 • Establish Humanitarian Service Points and implement activities for children on the move.
 • Develop recommendations for child safeguarding risk assessments in programmes.

[Page 176]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
IRAQ
In support of Iraqi Red Crescent Society
National Society staff_________________________2,195 
National Society volunteers________________ 11,982 
National Society branches_____________________ 111 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DIQ001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment_________________420,000 
Disasters and crises____________________ 1,550,000 
Health and wellbeing____________________3,267,863 
Migration and displacement______________100,000 
Values, power and inclusion______________250,000 
Enabling functions_______________________ 500,000 
People to be reached
Climate and environment_____________________________________________________________________________220,000 
Disasters and crises___________________________________________________________________________________250,000 
Health and wellbeing__________________________________________________________________________________250,000 
Migration and displacement__________________________________________________________________________ 120,000 
Values, power and inclusion___________________________________________________________________________ 80,000 
2024 Key priorities and actions • Train Iraqi Red Crescent Society staff and volunteers on climate change/climate action and related areas.
 • Train Village Disaster Management Committees in target communities, and support Enhanced 
Vulnerability and Capacity Assessments.
 • Ensure the National Society is represented in relevant national health strategies, plans, laws, and policies related to epidemic and pandemic preparedness and response.
 • Develop training for National Society staff and volunteers on migration and displacement related issues, and provide tools and guidance.
 • Ensure that all National Society programmes and operations provide dignity, access, participation and safety (DAPS) for all people affected.
Participating National Societies
Danish Red Cross, German Red Cross, Norwegian Red Cross, Swedish Red Cross

[Page 177]
IFRC network country information
IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF
In support of Red Crescent Society of the Islamic Republic of Iran
National Society staff_________________________ 7,651 
National Society volunteers____________ 1,666,480 
National Society branches___________________7,897 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DIR001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment______________ 1,500,000 
Disasters and crises__________________573,026,000 
Health and wellbeing__________________ 26,857,686 
Migration and displacement___________ 4,000,000 
Values, power and inclusion__________ 24,250,000 
Enabling functions________________________350,000 
People to be reached
Climate and environment_____________________________________________________________________________200,000 
Disasters and crises___________________________________________________________________________________700,000 
Health and wellbeing__________________________________________________________________________________500,000 
Migration and displacement__________________________________________________________________________500,000 
Values, power and inclusion__________________________________________________________________________ 150,000 
2024 Key priorities and actions • Effectively engage young people and communities to address climate change, including through a community-level climate adaptation plan of action.
 • Support the National Society to enhance its community-based disaster-risk reduction activities.
 • Conduct Risk Communication and Community Engagement, Community-Based Health and first aid training for National Society staff and volunteers.
 • Respond to basic needs of people on the move – particularly Afghan migrants – and host communities, and provide training in branches along the border with Afghanistan.
 • Provide Protection, Gender and Inclusion training for volunteers and staff, and support in adapting the 
Child Safeguarding Policy and its tools.
Participating National Societies
Japanese Red Cross Society

[Page 178]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
JORDAN
In support of Jordan National 
Red Crescent Society
National Society staff____________________________ 52 
National Society volunteers____________________312 
National Society branches______________________ 11 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DJO001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment_________________690,000 
Disasters and crises____________________ 1,325,000 
Health and wellbeing____________________1,270,000 
Migration and displacement_______________ 80,000 
Values, power and inclusion______________210,000 
Enabling functions_________________________ 78,000 
People to be reached
Climate and environment______________________________________________________________________________ 50,000 
Disasters and crises____________________________________________________________________________________ 25,000 
Health and wellbeing___________________________________________________________________________________ 90,000 
Migration and displacement___________________________________________________________________________ 50,000 
Values, power and inclusion___________________________________________________________________________ 10,000 
Ongoing emergency appeals and DREF
MDRS5002 Emergency Appeal, Complex Emergency
2024 Key priorities and actions • Raise public awareness of the climate crisis, foster environmental education, and advocate for evidencebased environmental policies.
 • Build a culture of resilience, ensuring that communities are better equipped to withstand and recover from disasters.
 • Ensure consistent access to essential healthcare services, particularly for people in underserved and at-risk communities.
 • Promote social cohesion and community integration for migrants and host communities.
 • Promote diversity and ensure that marginalized or vulnerable groups have access to the same opportunities and resources as the rest of society.
Participating National Societies
Iraqi Red Crescent Society, Kuwait Red Crescent Society, the Netherland Red Cross, Qatar Red Crescent 
Society, Red Crescent Society of the United Arab Emirates

[Page 179]
IFRC network country information
LEBANON
In support of Lebanese Red Cross
National Society staff___________________________399 
National Society volunteers________________ 14,563 
National Society branches_____________________204 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DLB001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment___________________ 3,898 
Disasters and crises___________________20,464,634 
Health and wellbeing__________________ 65,257,332 
Migration and displacement____________1,274,670 
Values, power and inclusion______________310,908 
Enabling functions_________________________ 20,000 
Ongoing emergency appeals and DREF
MDRS5002 Emergency Appeal, Complex Emergency; MDRLB015 DREF, Complex Emergency; MDRLB014 
DREF, Civil Unrest
2024 Key priorities and actions • Integrate environmental sustainability into all WASH interventions in institutions, emphasizing menstrual hygiene management, community engagement, and environmental conservation.
 • Support the establishment and enhancement of 16 Disaster Management Centres funded by participating National Society partners.
 • Scale up Primary Healthcare services, strengthening Mobile Medical Units and enhancing community outreach initiatives.
 • Ensure the needs of migrants and displaced persons are met with effectiveness and compassion.
 • Enhance services in mental health and psychosocial support, and ensure the implementation of protection, gender and inclusion standards.
Participating National Societies
Austrian Red Cross, British Red Cross, Danish Red Cross, French Red Cross, German Red Cross, Japanese 
Red Cross Society, Norwegian Red Cross, Qatar Red Crescent Society, Spanish Red Cross, Swedish Red 
Cross, Swiss Red Cross, The Canadian Red Cross Society, The Netherlands Red Cross

[Page 180]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
LIBYA
In support of Libyan Red Crescent
National Society staff___________________________230 
National Society volunteers________________ 10,800 
National Society branches______________________ 39 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DLY001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment_________________250,000 
Health and wellbeing____________________1,498,317 
Migration and displacement____________1,100,000 
Values, power and inclusion_____________ 600,000 
Enabling functions_______________________ 600,000 
People to be reached
Climate and environment______________________________________________________________________________ 50,000 
Health and wellbeing__________________________________________________________________________________300,000 
Migration and displacement__________________________________________________________________________250,000 
Values, power and inclusion__________________________________________________________________________ 100,000 
Ongoing emergency appeals and DREF
MDRLY005 Emergency Appeal, Flood
2024 Key priorities and actions • Conduct enhanced vulnerability and capacity assessment in four of Libya’s most climate-affected areas, allowing for more effective programmatic interventions.
 • Strengthen the capacity of National Society disaster and crisis response teams at HQ and in branches through training and workshops.
 • Support deployment of mobile clinics during conflict or health emergencies, to provide communities with access to basic health services.
 • Support the National Society to establish a Migration Centre, and continue to collaborate on the provision of support to people on the move through Humanitarian Service Points.
 • Strengthen child protection frameworks through the adoption of a Child Safeguarding policy, and conduct training on protection, gender and inclusion.

[Page 181]
IFRC network country information
SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC
In support of Syrian Arab Red Crescent
National Society staff_________________________6,163 
National Society volunteers_________________10,172 
National Society branches_____________________109 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DSY001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment________________ 280,000 
Disasters and crises___________________ 30,029,574 
Health and wellbeing__________________ 13,680,805 
Migration and displacement______________350,000 
Values, power and inclusion______________150,000 
Enabling functions_____________________ 9,282,024 
People to be reached
Climate and environment__________________________________________________________________________________ 550 
Disasters and crises___________________________________________________________________________________352,000 
Health and wellbeing________________________________________________________________________________ 1,144,000 
Migration and displacement___________________________________________________________________________ 53,000 
Values, power and inclusion___________________________________________________________________________ 30,000 
Ongoing emergency appeals and DREF
MDRS5002 Emergency Appeal, Complex Emergency, MDRS5002 Emergency Appeal, Complex Emergency; 
MDRSY009 Emergency Appeal, Earthquake; MDRSY011 DREF, Drought; MDRSY010 DREF, Fire
2024 Key priorities and actions • Enable the National Society to proactively prepare for and respond to protracted and sudden/slow onset emergencies and crises. • Support the National Society to undertake enhanced Vulnerability and Capacity Assessments in all governorates of Syria and develop contingency plans to increase community resilience.
 • Enhance the National Society capacities to deliver comprehensive health services.
 • Enable the National Society to proactively prepare for and respond to protracted and sudden/slow onset emergencies and crises.
 • Mainstream protection, gender and inclusion principles across all sectors, including prevention of sexual- and gender-based violence and promotion of safeguarding and disability inclusion.
Participating National Societies
British Red Cross, Danish Red Cross, Finnish Red Cross, German Red Cross, Norwegian Red Cross, 
Swedish Red Cross, Swiss Red Cross

[Page 182]
IFRC Global Plan 2024
YEMEN
In support of Yemen Red Crescent Society
National Society staff___________________________450 
National Society volunteers_________________ 5,402 
National Society branches______________________ 32 https://data.ifrc.org/FDRS/national-society/
DYE001
2024 Network funding requirements (CHF)
Climate and environment_______________1,275,420 
Disasters and crises____________________16,347,615 
Health and wellbeing__________________ 15,768,944 
Migration and displacement______________545,235 
Values, power and inclusion______________ 419,670 
Enabling functions______________________ 2,165,157 
People to be reached
Climate and environment______________________________________________________________________________ 15,400 
Disasters and crises___________________________________________________________________________________ 772,029 
Health and wellbeing__________________________________________________________________________________ 917,306 
Migration and displacement___________________________________________________________________________ 10,560 
Values, power and inclusion__________________________________________________________________________ 309,975 
Ongoing emergency appeals and DREF
MDRYE013 DREF, Cyclone 
2024 Key priorities and actions • Conduct capacity-building workshops for National Society staff and volunteers to enhance their knowledge and capacities related to climate and environmental crises.
 • Provide training for community Disaster Management committees and raise awareness of disaster-risk reduction methods among people at risk.
 • Support a review of the Yemen Red Crescent Society’s Health Strategic plan in line with crisis needs, and develop policies and standards in mental health, primary health care and the emergency health system.

[Page 183]
THE FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES 
OF THE INTERNATIONAL RED CROSS 
AND RED CRESCENT MOVEMENT
Humanity
The International Red Cross and Red Crescent 
Movement, born of a desire to bring assistance without discrimination to the wounded on the battlefield, endeavours, in its international and national capacity, to prevent and alleviate human suffering wherever it may be found. Its purpose is to protect life and health and to ensure respect for the human being. It promotes mutual understanding, friendship, cooperation and lasting peace amongst all peoples.
Impartiality 
It makes no discrimination as to nationality, race, religious beliefs, class or political opinions. It endeavours to relieve the suffering of individuals, being guided solely by their needs, and to give priority to the most urgent cases of distress.
Neutrality
In order to enjoy the confidence of all, the Movement may not take sides in hostilities or engage at any time in controversies of a political, racial, religious or ideological nature.
Independence
The Movement is independent. The National Societies, while auxiliaries in the humanitarian services of their governments and subject to the laws of their respective countries, must always maintain their autonomy so that they may be able at all times to act in accordance with the principles of the Movement.
Voluntary service 
It is a voluntary relief movement not prompted in any manner by desire for gain.
Unity 
There can be only one Red Cross or Red Crescent 
Society in any one country. It must be open to all. 
It must carry on its humanitarian work throughout its territory.
Universality 
The International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, in which all societies have equal status and share equal responsibilities and duties in helping each other, is worldwide.

[Page 184]
twitter.com/ifrc | facebook.com/ifrc | instagram.com/ifrc | youtube.com/user/ifrc | tiktok.com/@ifrc
The International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) is the world’s largest humanitarian network, with 191 National Red Cross and Red 
Crescent Societies and around 16.5 million volunteers. Our volunteers are present in communities before, during and after a crisis or disaster. We work in the most hard to reach and complex settings in the world, saving lives and promoting human dignity. We support communities to become stronger and more resilient places where people can live safe and healthy lives, and have opportunities to thrive.