[Page 1]
Climate Protection Part Concept 
Adapting to the Impacts of Climate Change in Berlin вҖ“ AFOK
Executive Summary

[Page 2]
1. Introduction 
Climate Change and Adaptation 
Berlin acts 
2. Regional Climate in Berlin 2050 and 2100 
Methodology 
Climate Signals in Detail 
3. Vulnerability and Measures 
Action Area Human Health and Civil Protection 
Action Area Buildings, Urban Development, Green and Public Space 
Action Area Water Supply and Distribution 
Action Area Environment and Nature 
Action Area Energy Supply and Waste Management 
Action Area Industry, Services and Financial Sector 
Action Area Traffic 
Action Area Tourism, Culture, Sports 
Action Area Education 
4. Making Adaptation Happen 
Implementation 
Monitoring 
Communication 
5. Conclusion 
Glossary 
This brochure is a summary of the draft for an вҖҳAdaptation Concept of the Impact of Climate Change in 
BerlinвҖҷ (AFOK), which has been developed from end of 2014 to early 2016 on behalf of the Berlin Senate 
Department for Urban Development and Environment. It has been funded by the Federal Ministry for the 
Environment, Nature Conservation, Building and Nuclear Safty (Bundesministerium fГјr Umwelt, NaturВӯ schutz, Bau und Reaktorsicherheit, BMUB). 
The AFOK final report has two parts: Part I: Main report. Part II: Supplementary Material. The report has been published by a research consortium led by the Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research (PIK) in 
July 2016: Reusswig, F.; Becker, C.; Lass, W.; Haag, L.; Hirschfeld, J.; Knorr, A.; LГјdeke, M.K.B.; Neuhaus, A.; 
Pankoke, C.; Rupp, J., Walther, C.; Walz, S.; Weyer, G.; Wiesemann, E. (2016): Anpassung an die Folgen des 
Klimawandels in Berlin (AFOK). Klimaschutz Teilkonzept. Teil I: Hauptbericht; Teil II: Materialien. Potsdam, 
Berlin. Juli 2016 [Adaptation Concept of the Impacts of Climate Change in Berlin (AFOK). Climate Protection 
Partial Concept. Part I: Main Report; Part II: Supplementing Material; available in German only]. Juli 2016. umwelt/klimaschutz/klimawandel/de/anpassungskonzept_berlin/index.shtml

[Page 3]
Adapting to Climate Change | General Interest for the Growing City
Adapting to climate change: 
A general interest for the growing city
The worldвҖҳs climate is changing. 
The effects are also felt in Berlin. 
They will accelerate, as we stand at the beginning of a profound change. For our growing city, this represents a major chalВӯ lenge. We must find ways to furВӯ ther strengthen Berlin not only as an economic, social and culВӯ tural center, but also to develop it in carbon neutral and climate-adapted manner. This is the only way to avert or to reduce the damage to the city and its citizens. We will ensure that - even under modified climatic conditions - BerlinвҖҷs growth will continue to conВӯ tribute to our goal: maintain BerlinвҖҷs qualities as an attracВӯ tive, efficient and livable European metropolis. 
For this purpose, we will implement the tools we have deВӯ veloped together with the urban community, such as the 
Urban Development Concept (StEK) 2030, the Berlin Energy and Climate Protection Programme (BEK) 2030, or many other specific plans and projects. With the Berlin Energy 
Transition Act (Berliner Energiewendegesetz, EWG Bln), which came into effect by April 5, 2016, we dispose of the legal basis also for a comprehensive adaptation process. 
On behalf of my administration, the Potsdam Institute for 
Climate Impact Research has in collaboration with other partners and experts, elaborated a вҖҳBerlin Concept for AdВӯ aptation to the Impacts of Climate ChangeвҖҷ (AFOK). It proВӯ vides the strategic framework for adapting nature, the economy and society to climate change while at the same time preserving the quality of urban life. 
This brochure is meant to bring the AFOK closer to you and shall help to develop an understanding and passion for the future task of climate change adaptation.
Andreas Geisel
Senator for Urban Development and Environment
Adaptation or mitigation, which is a priority in facing climate change risks? The unequivocal answer is: both. Both are essenВӯ tial. Therefore, it is good that 
Berlin does both. The Berlin 
Energy and Climate Protection 
Programme want to reduce the emission of greenhouse gases and aims at carbon neutrality until 2050. The вҖҳBerlin Concept for Adaptation to the ImВӯ pacts of Climate ChangeвҖҷ (AFOK) presents another building block for BerlinвҖҷs climate policy. We are pleased that this is happening on the solid ground of science, and that the 
Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research (PIK) was able to assist in the elaboration of both concepts. 
We must now renounce fossil fuels, if we want to limit cliВӯ mate change to a manageable level. The immediate reducВӯ tion of emissions and divestment are important tools: withВӯ drawing public funds from climate-damaging investments in coal or oil in order to put the released funds in clean and sustainable technologies. The вҖҳParis AccordвҖҷ, enacted at the 
COP 21 in December 2015, has set clear goals here. 
Even a climate neutral Berlin will have to adapt to a changВӯ ing climate. We have already deposited too much CO2 in the atmosphere; it will remain effective there for centuries. Our 
Earth responds slowly however relentlessly to climate change. Climate change is a global reality already today, even in Germany. Heat waves and extreme rain events are increasing. Without adaptation, the consequences of cliВӯ mate change in Berlin would lead to considerable damages. 
All the more important it is that the Berlin Senate now quickly starts with the implementation of the measures provided by AFOK.
Hans Joachim Schellnhuber
Director of the Potsdam-Institute for Climate Impacts Research

[Page 4]
1. Introduction
Adaptation to climate change вҖ“ a challenge for Berlin
Since the beginning of industrialisaВӯ tion, the Global Mean Temperature (GMT) has been gradually rising. SciВӯ entific research has shown that huВӯ mankind is responsible for the major part of this increase. Therefore, it is called anthropogenic - caused by huВӯ mans - climate change. 
The major driving force is primarily the burning of fossil fuels (coal, oil, and natural gas), large-scale deforestВӯ ation, and agricultural production, not at least livestock. The related emisВӯ sion of greenhouse gases (CO2, CH4, 
N2O, and others) is changing the chemical composition of the atmosВӯ phere and hence its radiation balance. 
While the global mean temperature has been rising by about 0.8вҖүВ°C during the past 100 years, Europe has been warming by about 1.3вҖүВ°C in the same period. According to IPCC, this warmВӯ ing is accompanied by the change of rainfall patterns, melting glaciers and polar ice caps, rising sea levels and inВӯ creasing weather extremes.
The first decade of the 21st century is among the worldвҖҳs warmest years since the beВӯ ginning of instrumental weather records more than 
100 years ago.
In terms of temperature, the years 
2014 and 2015 have been GermanyвҖҷs hottest two years since the beginning of instrumental measurement in 
1881.
Climate change has just begun. Due to the inertia of the climate system, the temperature continues to rise even if we should succeed to stabilize greenВӯ house gas emissions at current levels. 
However, that is not to be expected. 
Despite the Paris Agreement, signed at the end of 2015, global emissions continue to rise. If this trend is to be upheld, the global mean temperature might increase to a range of 2 to 6вҖүВ°C by 2100. 
Berlin will inevitably be afВӯ fected. Our city is adjusted to a past climate that we assume to be вҖҳnormalвҖҷ. The same apВӯ plies to our environment, as well as to people, buildings and the urban infrastructure. 
The expectable climate change will modify this historical вҖҳfitвҖҷ of the city and its climate in an historical unprecВӯ edented manner. Our understanding of what is being normal will be considВӯ erably shifted. The record heat wave summer of 2003, claimed at least 
50,000 lives and additional heat stress related deaths in this unusually warm summer. By 2050, this kind of summer will become a normal one. By 2100, the summer of 2003 will be felt as a particularly cold one. 
Berlin must actively adapt in order to reduce the damages from future cliВӯ mate change, but also to exploit the future opportunities that climate change might bring. It is in no way sufficient to wait and see, or hope for the spontaneous adaptive capacity of the urban society. The latter will be needed. But it cannot be activated withВӯout reliable future climate scenarВӯ ios, without a detailed analysis of vulВӯ nerabilities and coordinated adaptaВӯ tion strategy by the Senate of Berlin. 
AFOK forms a basis for all this.

[Page 5]
| | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
Adaptation to the Impacts of Climate Change in Berlin | Introduction
Toulouse
Berlin
Fig. 1: According to the AFOK scenarios, BerlinвҖҷs climate (monthly tempeВӯ rature and rainfall patterns) of 2100 will resemble todayвҖҷs climate of the city of Toulouse in Southern France.
2016
Toulouse
2100
Berlin
In 2100, Berlin might have the climate that Toulouse has today

[Page 6]
Berlin acts: The AFOK as part of an overall strategy for adaptation to climate change
Concept for adaptation to the impacts of climate change вҖ“ 
AFOK В„ В„
Berlin climate scenarios 2050/2100 В„ В„ Vulnerability of the city В„ В„ Action areas for risk prevention + climate adaptation В„ В„ Interdisciplinary action plan
Berlin Climate Model В„ В„
Current climate situation 2015 В„ В„ Planning guide to maintain urban climate functions
Urban Development Plan 
Climate вҖ“ KONKRET В„ В„
Guiding themes , strategies, and urban planning measures В„ В„ Water sensitive urban development В„ В„ Heat adapted urban growth
Fig. 2: Core elements of BerlinвҖҷs climate change adaptation strategy.
Not just since cooperating with the AFOK Berlin has started taking charge of climate change impacts and how to deal with it. The first report on the consequences of climate change for Berlin was already issued as early as 2009, and in 2011 the Urban Development Plan Climate (StEP Klima) was presented by the Senate. In 2015/16 an updated verВӯ sion has been worked out, focusing on the specific challengВӯ es of BerlinвҖҷs recent growth. StEP Klima KONKRET (StEP CliВӯ mate Concrete) is addressing future climate change under a deliberately space-oriented planning perspective. Since 
2016, the Environmental Atlas, BerlinвҖҷs map and info server on environmental issues, provides a new climate model (вҖҳPlanning Advices Urban ClimateвҖҷ), showing what areas suffer from adverse climatic conditions already today, and where Berlin has capability of relief.
The AFOK is addressing BerlinвҖҷs future climate and it selects a sectoral, not a space perspective. It thus takes up the obВӯ jectives of the Berlin Energy Transition Act (EWG Bln), stipuВӯ lating the improved adaptive capacity of natural, social and economic systems as well as the preservation of the funcВӯ tionality of urban infrastructures and the quality of life as an obligation for the Berlin Senate.

[Page 7]
Anpassung an die Folgen des Klimawandels in Berlin | Einleitung
Adaptation to the Impacts of Climate Change in Berlin | Introduction
Fig. 3: Formation steps of AFOK final report
Path model climate impacts Berlin
Communication Workshop
Climate signal patterns (weather butterfly)
Stakeholder workshops
Cost-benefit-assessment 
Communication concept
Regionalised climate projections (12 IPCC AOGCMs, CORDEX)
Retrospective sensitivity analysis
Alignment with other projects
Monitoring concept
Additional adaptation measures
Stakeholder data evaluation
Structured stakeholder interviews
AFOK final Report
Desk top research
Together with StEP Climate/StEP Climate KONKRET and the 
Planning Advices Urban Climate, the AFOK provides a powВӯ erful framework for an overall climate adaptation strategy for Berlin. Based on current global and regional scenarios it describes the climatic changes that Berlin is facing in the near (2050) and distant (2100) future and identifies against this background the vulnerabilities for various socio-ecoВӯ logical sectors. In addition, AFOK offers strategic starting points and concrete proposals of measures that aim to acВӯ tively counteract future challenges and to reduce damages if possible. 
AFOK has been worked out in a transdisciplinary work proВӯ cess and in a close dialogue with the expert community and the administration. More than 100 people brought their knowledge and experience into the process via stakeholder interviews and three workshops. 
Fig. 4: At the AFOK stakeholder workshops the expert public was able to discuss two major issues in plenary and group discussions: вҖҳWhat are the future impacts of climate change for Berlin?вҖҷ (vulnerability) and вҖҳWhat can we do about it?вҖҷ (measures).

[Page 8]
Extreme events
Averages
Day
Day
Hot day
Heat wave
Frost day
Cold spell
Repeated heat wave years
Storm
Storm period
Period < 3 weeks
Period < 3 weeks
Season
Warm summers
Cold summers
Cold winters
Repeated warm years
Repeated cold years
Mild winters
Multi-annual
Multi-annual
2. Regional Climate in Berlin 2050 and 2100
Methodology
Since we cannot predict the future climate, we have to asВӯ sess it based upon climate models. Currently there is a mulВӯ titude of them, each endowed with specific strengths and weaknesses. There is no way to tell with certainty today which one will have been the one that has predicted the future correctly. It would therefore unwise to put all eggs in one basket and rely on only one climate model. For some time past a so-called scientific standard has generally been accepted to consider model ensembles which means includВӯ ing several future models. This has been done in this report. 
For the vulnerability analysis and the development of measВӯ ures of AFOK, 12 combinations of six regional and five globВӯ al climate models were used. A standard parameter served as an emission scenario that assumes global warming in the range of 2.6вҖүВ° to 4.8вҖүВ°C until the end of the 21st century.
Fig. 5: The three key climate phenomena temperature, precipitation, and wind and the expected trends in different temporal characterisВӯ tics (the AFOK вҖҳWeather ButterflyвҖҷ).
 Temperature
Raising temperatures in the Berlin reВӯ gion have already been observed in the recent past. For the near future, a further increase in the average daily maximum temperatures of about 1.2вҖүВ°C, for the distant future additional 3.2вҖүВ°C can be expected. 
This increase will be particularly striking during autumn and winter. 
Summers in Berlin will also become warmer. Towards the mid of the century, summers will be about 1вҖүВ°C warmer than today, towards the end about 3вҖүВ°C. It is one of the вҖҳhallmarksвҖҷ of climate change that the extreme values will increase more markedly than the averВӯ ages.
 Wind
The variable wind speed is the most difficult one to derive from the models. Until 2100, the model combinations used here do not show a clear trend of increased or decreased storm events. But uncertainties are quite high.

[Page 9]
Averages
Day
Heavy snowfall
Enduring snowfall
Increased heavy rain events
Increase of multiannual rain events
Subsequent years with dry periods
Heavy rainfall
Hail
Thunder storm
Period < 3 weeks
Period < 3 weeks
Season
Season
Dry winter
Dry summer
Dry spring
Humid spring
Humid winter
Humid summer
Dry periods
Continuous rainfall
Multi-annual
Multi-annual
Adaptation to the Impacts of Climate Change in Berlin | Regional Climate in Berlin 2050 and 2100
Strong increase
Increase
No change
Decrease
Strong decrease
No projection possible
As a result, one therefore does not receive a single value for a specific climate parameter per time unit, but a frequency distribution of the various model results. As a basis for the 
AFOK vulnerability assessment and the development of measures, we assumed the range of outcomes that a majorВӯ ity of two thirds of the models used predicted.SubВӯ
Climate Signals in detail sequently, from the entire time span covered by the models until 2100 two focus periods have been selected as benchВӯ marks for the AFOK impact assessment: the вҖҳtime sliceвҖҷ from 2031 to 2060 (termed вҖҳnear futureвҖҷ), and the 20712100 period (termed вҖҳdistant futureвҖҷ). The most relevant model results have been summarized graphically in the socalled вҖҳweather butterflyвҖҷ (cf. Figure 5), systematizing the key weather parameters in their respective characteristic in time. Precipitation
Due to climate change, Berlin will experience an increase of average annual precipitation of about 3 to 
10% (near future) and 7.5 to 18% (distant future). The strongest inВӯ crease can be expected in spring and winter, while it will be less marked in autumn and, especially, in summer. 
Particularly important is a trend in exВӯ tremes: the increase of heavy rain events (more than 10mm precipitation per day). 
Currently, Berlin sees about 11 of these events per year. Under climate change, there will be about 15 (near future) or 17 (distant future) events per year. 
As the temperatures will increase especially during winВӯ ter, Berlin will have considerably less snow in the fuВӯ ture. Despite an average increase in precipitation, we will experience more dry periods, combined with periВӯ ods of heavy rainfall at other times.

[Page 10]
3. Vulnerabilities and Measures
How vulnerable is Berlin to climate change impacts? The vulnerability of the city depends on several factors. The first one is the concrete character of climatic changes that have to be expected, such as temperature, precipitation, and wind, as has been shown in chapter 2. But the extent of potential loss due to climatic changes does also depend upon two further factors. Firstly, the exposition of someВӯ thing or somebody to weather signals is important. Heat waves for example will affect people working outside much heavier than people sitting in air -conditioned offices. The вҖҳexpositionвҖҷ of the former is much higher than that of the latter. A second factor is the вҖҳsensitivityвҖҷ of a system. Small children or chronically ill people for example are much more sensitive to the risks of enduring heat waves than healthy adults. 
A final decisive factor that determines the vulnerability of a system is its adaptive capacity. If urban infrastructures, buildings, organizational routines and individual behaviour are attuned to changing boundary conditions, their adapВӯ tive capacity will increase and their vulnerability decreases. 
This is exactly what the AFOK measures aim at: reducing or even avoiding potential losses and thus reducing BerlinвҖҷs vulnerability. 
In the following, the assessment of vulnerability to climate change will be presented separately for different fields of action, as exposition, sensitivity and adaptive capacity vary from sector to sector. 
Berlin is not an island вҖ“
Indirect effects of climate change
Climate change is a global phenomenon and its conseВӯ quences will be felt differently across the world. Due to its geographical location in the center of Europe, its role as the 
German capital and the diverse functional interrelations 
Berlin is also indirectly vulnerable to climate impacts that occur elsewhere - for example, in southern Germany, France or Africa. In addition to the risks posed by so-called вҖҳtipping pointsвҖҷ in the climate system (such as the weakening of the 
Gulf stream), the following indirect effects can be observed in part already today:
В„ В„
Environmental and climate refugees: In addition to many other causes, there are also increasing extreme events like floods and droughts that threaten the liveliВӯ hoods of millions of people, especially in developing countries. For many of them flight is the only escape. 
Europe and Berlin are increasingly becoming the target areas.
В„ В„ Foreign trade: BerlinвҖҷs industry is heavily dependent on exports (50 percent) and import also plays a major role. 
Besides the EU, the regional focus is on the United 
States of America, Russia, Turkey and the Asia-Pacific region. Climate change affects markets and supply chains.
В„ В„ Tourism: in 2015 foreign guests booked 45% of all overВӯ night stays in Berlin. Travelers could carry diseases or be directly affected by climate change.
В„ В„ Transport: Via its roads, rail, aviation and waterways, 
Berlin is connected to the world. Impairments caused by storms, heat waves or heavy rainfall elsewhere can lead to severe disruptions in Berlin.
В„ В„ Power supply: BerlinвҖҷs power grid is mainly placed unВӯ derground and thus less vulnerable to weather exВӯ tremes. However, due to its power import of about 40%, 
Berlin remains vulnerable towards weather impacts on the German and European power grids. 
Adaptation to climate change at national and global levels will indirectly reduce BerlinвҖҷs vulnerability. Successful adapВӯ tation in Berlin does not only help its local citizens.

[Page 11]
Adaptation to the Impacts of Climate Change in Berlin | Vulnerabilities and Measures
Action Area Human Health and Civil Protection
The health of BerlinвҖҷs population will be affected by climate change not only due to gradual changes of weather paramВӯ eters, but also by an increased amount of weather extremes (e.g. heavy rain, heat waves). 
Among minor complications such as sleep disturbance or impaired labour productivity, hot days and heat waves can lead to cardiovascular emergencies (up to heat strokes), cases of dehydration (the вҖҳdrying outвҖҷ due to lack of fluid intake), and respiratory diseases (such as chronic obstrucВӯ tive pulmonary disease; COPD).
Particularly distressing for the human organВӯ ism is the presence of several hot days in a row, in which even at night no appreciable cooling occurs and most people cannot really recuperВӯ ate.
Studies suggest that heat stress results in a 43% higher mortality risk, especially in patients with chronic lung disВӯ ease. Overall, especially the elderly, sick people and young children are at risk. Growing population numbers with a sigВӯ nificant increase of the very old - so the demographic foreВӯ casts for Berlin - indicate an even higher future vulnerabiliВӯ ty. The result: an increase in hospital admissions (morbidity) and deaths (mortality). According to studies, Berlin has alВӯ ready experienced about 1,400 additional heat related deaths annually in the 2001 to 2010 period.
But climate change also entails вҖҳcreepingвҖҷ health dangers, as living conditions for plants, animals and microorganisms gradually. This also allows new pathogens вҖ“ usually mediatВӯ ed through new or native disease carriers (вҖҳvectorsвҖҷ such as mice, mosquitoes or ticks) вҖ“ to settle areas that have been thus far вҖҳblockedвҖҷ to them by unfavourable weather condiВӯ tions. Ticks for example, which can transmit Lyme disease, have not been a major problem for Berlin so far, could beВӯ come more frequent here due to milder winters. 
Fig. 6: Children need speВӯ cial skin protection against solar radiation.
Fig. 7: Climate change could increase skin cancer cases.
Fig. 8: вҖҳAmbrosia NetВӯ work BerlinвҖҷ: Ragweed eradication action in 
Berlin Adlershof on 
June 26, 2015.
Fig. 9: Climate change inВӯ creases the risk that vector-borne diseases spread out вҖ“ here Aedes albopictus.
Fig. 10: Sufficient fluid inВӯ take is particularly imporВӯ tant for seniors.

[Page 12]
Fig. 11: Rescuers are facing new challenges under climate change вҖ“ for example in support of major events.
Climate change may also lead to the appearance of new host organisms, bringing along pathogens of diseases hitherto unknown in our latitudes. Exotic species such as 
Aedes albopictus or Aedes japonicus propagate to northern latitudes. For none of these species proven evidence exists in the Berlin area, but they have already reached the geoВӯ graphical latitude of Berlin. Pyrexical tropical diseases, with often fatal outcomes, can occur more often. However, reВӯ maining uncertainties are high and hence further research is needed. 
Influenced by climate change one can already today verify prolonged blossom periods of plants, associated with highВӯ er burdens on people suffering from pollinosis (allergies, which are transmitted through the air). Currently about 
700,000 Berliners are suffering from pollinosis today, and climate change will most probably increase the number of people affected. If not treated, chronic asthma is looming. 
High dust levels in the air, a typical concomitant of heat waves, are additionally promoting the occurrence of allerВӯ gies.
Another point of concern in Berlin is Ambrosia artemisiifoВӯ lia, or common ragweed. This plant, an invasive species from North America, produces highly allergenic pollen and finds more favourable living conditions in the course of cliВӯ mate change. The same is true for the oak processionary: 
The backs of older caterpillars are covered with poisonous hairs containing an urticating toxin, which may cause skin irritation and asthma. In hot and dry conditions the oak processionary is spreading as a dreaded forest pest. Finally, the increasing risk of skin cancer due to an increased solar exposure must not be underestimated: Skin cancer ranges among the ten most common cancers in 
Berlin between 2000 and 2014 - with a tendency to increase.
The Berlin population must be made aware of the risks of climate change. We need a coorВӯ dinated early warning system for heat events that effectively reaches those at risk in hosВӯ pitals, day care centres, nursing homes, and day care organisations. 
Doctors and pharmacists play an important role as competent and community multipliers. The first successful attempts at the Berlin CharitГ© show: as a perspective, we need the climate-adapted hospital to protect vulnerable patient groups against heat stress. The drinking water supply in public places must be gradually expanded on a low threshold (drinking fountain) network. Particularly exposed occupational groups need to be better protected. In the long run, the working and operating hours have to come to the test bed. In a hooter climate, food can spoil more easily and should be better checked accordingly. During hotter phases, canteens should offer lighter meals. In genВӯ eral, we need better health monitoring, more research on the specific effects of climate change on public health, and an urban and open space planning that supports changing public health requirements. 
Measures  В„
Upgrading of early warning systems  В„
Improvement of individual physical fitness  В„
Adjustment of medication and counselling  В„
Augmenting rescue services and civil protection  В„ (Elderly) care programme for climate adaptation  В„
Hospital programme for climate adaptation  В„
Securing a sufficient drinking supply  В„
Adaptation/ improvement of operational health and safety  В„
Flexibility of working and opening times  В„
Heat adapted food and beverage offers  В„
Exploration of climate-related health risks  В„
Allergy-sensitive landscape planning

[Page 13]
Adaptation to the Impacts of Climate Change in Berlin | Vulnerabilities and Measures
New challenges for civil protection
In addition to the Senate, the districts and the Berlin 
Fire Department, many private relief and rescue organВӯ isations are important actors of civil protection: the 
Arbeiter-Samariter-Bund e.V. (ASB) for example, or the 
German Red Cross (DRK), the volunteer fire fighters (FF), the Johanniter-Unfall-Hilfe e.V. (JUH), the Malteser 
Hilfsdienst (MHD) or the Federal Agency for Technical 
Relief (THW) are important pillars of the Berlin civil protection.
The adaptive capacity of the Berlin rescue services and civil protection вҖ“ especially of the Fire Department as a core вҖ“ can be classified as high. However, climate change will be associated with an increase in weather induced everyday risks, such as floods, emergencies due to heat stress, and вҖ“ to a lesser degree вҖ“ more fires due to more summer dry periods. More heat peaks and more heavy rainfall will occur in future summers in close succession, confronting the emergency services with new challenges. The so-called вҖҳextraordinary inciВӯ dentsвҖҷ will occur more often, asking for an improved coordination of the Fire Department, the police, and public as well as private rescue services. The Berlin Fire 
Department already today is offering disaster informaВӯ tion and warning services for smartphones, SMS and 
E-mail (KATWARN). More people need to be interested in the use of these systems. In the medium term the vehicle fleet in the emergency services must be reВӯ stocked, education and training have to take into account new risk situations, and the public needs to be included into the civil protection system.

[Page 14]
Fig. 12: Adaptation potential in the compressed perimeter block development.
Action area Buildings, Urban Development, Green and Public Space
Due to their dense construction volume, their reduced evaporation and the multiple barriers to the exchange of air, cities are significantly warmer than their surrounding countryside. This phenomenon is also known as вҖҳUrban 
Heat IslandвҖҷ (UHI) effect. 
The core urban areas within the Berlin S-BahnRing are on average around 5вҖүВ°C warmer than the mostly open areas of the surroundings of BerВӯ lin.
Thereby the built urban surface is increasing the health risks of its inhabitants due to the expected higher temperatures, especially in summer. Intermittent dry periods set the urban parks under stress. And the increase in heavy rain events will lead to more flooding in highly sealed urban space - road sections and basement are under water, underground shafts are in danger, the sewers are overstretched.
Although Berlin has experienced such events repeatedly in recent years, they are only the foretaste of what has to be expected in the long run. At the same time Berlin is growing вҖ“ most recently by about 40,000 people per year, partly due to global migration processes. The construction of new resВӯ idential buildings has a high priority, and in addition to homes, job opportunities, schools etc. need to be built. 
The вҖҳcompact city of short distancesвҖҷ is still the paradigm of urban development. It additionВӯ ally offers many advantages for the goals of cliВӯ mate protection. When it comes to climate adapВӯ tation, however, the urban fabric needs to be more open and requires de-densification. 
This is a charged relationship, but not necessarily an irreВӯ solvable contradiction. Because with good planning we may well have both: more housing and simultaneously more cliВӯ
P
Securing the ventilation / air exchange between green areas and courtyards
Bright colours and shading elements on south-facing facades 
In re-densiп¬Ғed areas/ new buildings:
- Blue-green roofs as a retention area
- Intensive facade greening preferably at sun-exposed sides
Shading from trees, preferably on the south side
Albedo roofs
Small parks as wellness places, unsealing of courtyards
Streets and squares as wellness places
Parking spaces as temporary storage areas in case of heavy rain
Cooling green spaces
Simple faГ§ade greening for the building stock

[Page 15]
Fig. 13, 14: Shadowed public spaces in the urban centre, heat protection inoptimized facades
Adaptation to the Impacts of Climate Change in Berlin | Vulnerabilities and Measures matic relief in the city. The two can go together if we not only consider the urban green surface area, but also its density and its multiple functions. If strategically important green areas are upgraded and retrofitted for cliВӯ mate change, Berlin can well benefit from the cooling and evaporation of its green areas вҖ“ even without an inВӯ crease of them.
The superior goal of all these measВӯ ures is to rebuild and re-qualify the city surface in such a way that even a growing Berlin can maintain its qualiВӯ ty of life in the face of climate change.
If strategic green and open spaces are protected, if a systematic roof and faВӯ cade greening is implemented, if the remaining urban green is revalued, if sealed areas become permeable for precipitation, if green comfort zones are built into the urВӯ ban quarters, then Berlin can grow in a climate-adapted manner. A new handling of water in the city (see box вҖҳsponge cityвҖҷ on page 17) complements these physical measures.
Measures  В„
Protecting climatic relief areas  В„
Creation of qualified green and open spaces, systematic strategy of roof and facade greening  В„
Increasing the resilience of urban green  В„
Climatic decoupling of new construction projects  В„
Climatic qualification of city surface  В„
Climate adaptation strategies at the neighbourhood level  В„
Pilot projects on climate adaptation  В„
Climate-proofing of existing planning instruments  В„
Provide cooled rooms during heat  В„
Limitation of conventional air conditioners  В„
Better information for tenants and owners  В„
Public debate on storm water management

[Page 16]
Fig. 15: Combined sewers. Fig. 16: In order to combat the fish die-offs the aeration vessel is supplying surface water with oxygen.
Action Area Water Supply and Distribution
Each year approximately 522 million m3 rain water is falling onto the city region of Berlin. About 321 million m3 of this volume seeps away, 142 million m3 seep away into the ground, and almost 70 million m3 are discharged via the sewage system. According to the AFOK scenarios two trends are particularly noteworthy: first, the annual precipitation will increase until 2050 by about 3 to 10 percent, and until 
2100 by about 8 to 18 percent, particularly during winter. 
Secondly, under climate change we can expect an increase in heavy rain events, between about 14 and 40 percent by 
2050, and about 22 to 80 percent by 2100. This results in a number of risks.
A well-known problem is posed by the combined sewer sysВӯ tem, discharging rainwater along with waste water in a sinВӯ gle sewer system. For historical reasons it can be found mainly in the inner city of Berlin. When heavy rainfall ocВӯ curs, the combined sewer system is overloaded and disВӯ charges rainwater together with untreated sewage flows directly into the surface waters. The Senate and the Berlin water works (Berliner Wasserbetriebe, BWB) have been inВӯ vesting heavily in measures to increase the underground storage volume. But as climate change might lead to an inВӯ crease in heavy rain events, it will pose a clear risk of counteracting or even eliminating the imВӯ provements reached by the investment of the recent years. 
In the future, hotter summers may be associatВӯ ed with longer dry periods. This reduces the waВӯ ter flow through the sewage system, causing unpleasant odors. In addition, the water levels and the flow rate of river Spree can be reduced. 
Simultaneously, these weather conditions will lead to an increased water demand in the city.
Right in this field of action, a significant need for adaptation is given, if damages are to be avoidВӯ ed and cost burdens should be reduced. Through a combination of different measures BerlinвҖҷs water supply and distribution can be made cliВӯ mate-proof. In this context it is very helpful that in recent years the BWB have been initiating a number of research and development projects, addressing exactly these future challenges. 
The measures are intended to increase the decentralized rainwater infiltration, to prepare the surface of the city for temporary flooding and controlled drainage and to treat only the inevitable remaining amount of water in the classiВӯ cal sewage system. The free supply of drinking water in the public space has to be expanded rapidly. Water in the city needs to become more accessible and should also be deВӯ signed in aesthetic attractive ways. 
Measures  В„
Decoupling of rainwater management from centralised systems  В„
Flood-fit design of surfaces  В„
Adapting infrastructures to heavy rain events  В„
Adapting infrastructures to drought and heat  В„ (Drinking) water quality protection  В„
Increasing climatic effectiveness of water bodies  В„ Expansion of the drinking fountain network  В„
Creation of bathing facilities and swimming pools  В„
Water sensitive climate adaptation as public issue  В„
Information for vulnerable urban areas  В„
Exploration of climate change effects on water balance

[Page 17]
Fig. 17: Rendering Flussbad Berlin/Friedrichsgracht with plant/gravel filter.
Adaptation to the Impacts of Climate Change in Berlin | Vulnerabilities and Measures вҖҳSponge cityвҖҷ Berlin
The measures in the areas of urban development and water must complement each other and achieve a synВӯ ergistic effect, which is referred to here as вҖҳsponge cityвҖҷ principle. Berlin needs to become a sponge city, so that it can deal with the risks of climate change well. What does that mean more concretely?
 В„
The permeability of the city surface for rain water must be increased to reduce the runoff and to reВӯ lieve the sewer. De-sealing and trough-trench sysВӯ tems are important here.
 В„
Defined road sections, park areas or city courts need to buffer the expected precipitation peaks in a decentralised manner in order to protect sensiВӯ tive buildings and infrastructure against urban flooding and relieve the sewers.
 В„
At the same time the evaporation rate must be inВӯ creased significantly. The evaporation process conВӯ sumes energy, thereby contributing to the cooling of the urban climate especially in the warmer months.
 В„
More small oases and wellness places in the Berlin districts are needed. In addition to their climatic and hydrologic functions, they also enhance the amenity of public spaces.  В„
A redesign of responsibilities and cost absorption is necessary and calls for improved coordination and communication with the urban society.
If Berlin is transformed according to these sponge city principles, it could increase its resilience; namely with regard to the two major effects of climate change - more heat and more heavy rainfall events. They could be significantly improved. The increase of costs for public infrastructure could be dampened, maybe even reduced, and the quality of lives and sojourning in the city can be enhanced.

[Page 18]
Action Area Environment and Nature
Berlin is a green city. Almost 44 percent of the city is covВӯ ered by forest, water, parks or sports grounds, allotments or agriculture - in Paris there are only 23 percent, in New 
York 27 percent. This вҖҳgreenвҖҷ Berlin has positive effects on the urban climate and is home to many animal and plant species. In addition, it offers various leisure and recreationВӯ al opportunities. 
Climate change will burden the soils. Dry periods will lead to hardening and compaction; heavy rains can promote soil erosion. BerlinвҖҷs 76 peatlands occupy only 0.8 percent of the city area, but they do have important ecological functions with respect to water storage and the generation of cool air. 
Longer dry periods imperil their functions. BerlinвҖҷs diverse water landscape is popular with nature lovers, bathers, anВӯ glers and boat athletes alike. Rising temperatures and the conditional sewage overflows due to heavy rains will negaВӯ tively affect the water quality. Berlin forests are not only recreational areas. They also sequester CO2, store (drinkВӯ ing) water, filter pollutants and cool the city. Hotter and partly drier summers put the trees under drought stress. 
Expected milder winters will increase the risk of pest infesВӯ tation. The urban greenery, such as parks, gardens, street trees etc. does also cool the city and ensures lower surface runoff. But also the urban greenery can be put under stress in hot and dry summers and will require more care. Already today, attentive nature enthusiasts can observe how the growing periods of many trees, shrubs and crops have changed. Also fish, amphibians or birds show altered patВӯ terns of behaviour.

[Page 19]
Fig. 18: The Berlin Tiergarten - resort, вҖҳgreen lungвҖҷ and cooling factor in the inner city.
Adaptation to the Impacts of Climate Change in Berlin | Vulnerabilities and Measures
The impacts of climate change on biodiversity are difficult to assess. Worldwide and in Germany deforestation and agВӯ riculture are still the most important drivers of biodiversity loss. Future climate change will lead to a shift of habitats, thus setting individual species under pressure. The correВӯ sponding trends must be strictly observed and explored furВӯ ther. More than 100 areas of nature and landscape protecВӯ tion must be monitored in their spatial context and need to be connected so that endangered species can migrate betВӯ ter.
Only about 2 percent of the Berlin land area (1,985 ha) is dedicated to agriculture - mostly for grain cultivation, perВӯ manent pasture or for growing fruit. The farms should be protected against damage caused by extreme events. AgriВӯ cultural lands should be preserved, not least for their serВӯ vice to provide fresh and cold air. 
The proposed measures are intended to better protect the sensitive parts of the green infrastructure of Berlin (for exВӯ ample, by securing and increasing the forest conversion programme). BerlinвҖҷs nature has to become more resilient to climate change (for example by planting more (native) species resistant to stress). The urban biodiversity of Berlin can be better protected by linking-up of nature protection areas and by an intensified use of the existing instrument of eco-accounts. 
Measures В„ В„
Precautionary soil protection В„ В„ Upgrading of the existing soil monitoring В„ В„ Protection and restoration of the Berlin peatlands В„ В„ Expansion of the Berlin peatland monitoring В„ В„ Backup, maintenance and development of the Berlin Forests В„ В„
Environmental monitoring of forests В„ В„
Climate resilient and locally adapted plantations В„ В„
Establishment of area pools / eco-accounts В„ В„
Review of existing protected areas В„ В„
Security and maintenance of BerlinвҖҳs cultural landscape В„ В„
Increase of the urban green volume В„ В„
Campaign on climate adaptation in allotments

[Page 20]
Fig. 20: Adaptation measures for employees working mainly outside reduce their vulnerability.
Fig. 19: Power Station Klingenberg in Berlin-Rummelsburg.
Action Area Energy Supply and Solid Waste Management
Climate change will in the longer term reduce the heating demand due to milder winters, while hotter summers on the other hand will lead to an increased demand for cooling of buildings. In the interests of BerlinвҖҷs climate neutrality tarВӯ get, the additional cooling of buildings should be realized primarily through passive measures (for example, by shadВӯ ing, ventilation, use of evaporative cooling), and by using renewable energy. Trigeneration (combined cooling, heat and power, CCHP) with an increasing share of renewable fuels is an option that fits well to BerlinвҖҷs curВӯ rent energy structure.
Throughout Germany the aboveground powВӯ er grid is considered vulnerable to extreme weather events вҖ“ there is a small but non-negligible risk of blackouts. In Berlin, most of the electricity network is underВӯ ground. But even here the climate change can be dangerous вҖ“ for example by so-called вҖҳsummer frostвҖҷ, that is line interruptions by subsidence of the soil due to prolonged dry periods. Transformer stations can fail at temperatures above 35вҖүВ°C. Due to technical improvements in the cooling of conventional power plants the thermal load on river Spree have been reduced in recent years. IncreasВӯ ing water temperatures due to climate change do thus not pose a significant risk in Berlin, other than in most other water cooled power plants in Germany. Grid upgrading, the roll-out of power storage, emergency planning and the imВӯ proved coordination of task forces will make BerlinвҖҷs power grid less prone to climate change damages. 
The cityвҖҷs waste management will be affected in two ways by climate change. Firstly, rising summer temperatures can affect the entire waste cycle. Odors will aggravate, and compost bins offer improved growth conditions for bacteria and other micro-organisms. Secondly, more heat events will impede on productivity and health of employees, espeВӯ cially outdoors (waste collection, street cleaning, recycling centers, composting plants). 
The adaptation strategy in the waste sector has to identify and improve sensitive process steps. For example, while abВӯ breviated collection cycles for the compost bin are no issue today, this needs to be reconsidered in the future. Already today the occupational safety and health of outdoor emВӯ ployees needs more attention, e.g. via lighter workwear or more cooling boxes for waste truck teams. In the medium term, the shifting of working hours to cooler times of the day needs to be considered. 
Measures  В„
Promoting energy-efficient cooling systems  В„
Take precautions for power supply disturbances  В„
Planning of energy systems under changed environmental conditions  В„
Optimization of energy infrastructure, focus: networks  В„
Optimization of energy infrastructure, focus: storage  В„ Assurance of waste collection during heat events and improved health protection for staff members  В„
Boost efforts to avoid waste

[Page 21]
Fig. 21: Employees working outside (e.g. construction workers) are particularly vulnerable to the effects of climate change.
Adaptation to the Impacts of Climate Change in Berlin | Vulnerabilities and Measures
Action Area Industry, Services and Financial Sector 
BerlinвҖҳs economy includes more than 170,000 firms, mostly small and medium enterprises, and has about 1.3 million emВӯ ployees. The focus of value creation lies with the service and trade sectors and likewise important are the construction and manufacturing industries. Climate change affects the economy in three ways. Firstly, extreme events can damage buildings and facilities. Secondly, there are adverse effects on the economic processes (from logistics to the water and enВӯ ergy supply to disposal). Thirdly, climate change can also imВӯ pair the productivity of the work force. Estimates of the value losses due to heat waves range from 0.03 to 2.8 percent of the current gross national product - depending upon the inВӯ tensity and duration of the event. Looking at the Berlin gross domestic product of 2015, this would mean losses in the range of 37 million вӮ¬ to 3.5 billion вӮ¬ per year.
First of all, the economy has to recognize these dangers and provide enterprise-specific risk assessments. In particular, small and medium enterprises (SMEs) need support for this step. Moderated round tables to exchange experiences are thereВӯ fore a first step for them. Certain industries (e.g. the construction industry) need reliaВӯ ble and user-friendly weather forecasts. 
Via the chambers, associations and the inВӯ surance industry, the creation of operaВӯ tional adaptation strategies should be enВӯ couraged and supported financially for 
SMEs.
Summer heat protection in commercial buildings should be expanded in order to protect the employees. Climate-friendly cooling options should be preferred. In the long run, we have to rethink working and opening hours, which requires the cooperaВӯ tion of management and trade unions. Last but not least, the development of adaptation solutions is also an opporВӯ tunity for the Berlin economy.
Measures  В„
Provision of reliable weather forecasts  В„
Training for damage prevention due to weather extremes  В„
Round tables for exchange of experience  В„
Adaptation of government aid for construction and of imВӯ plementation deadlines  В„
Design of corporation-specific climate adaptation concepts  В„
Design of sector-specific climate adaptation concepts  В„
Transition to flexible working and office hours  В„
Improved heat protection during summer  В„
Improved risk prevention for outdoor construction works

[Page 22]
Fig. 22: Heavy rainfall is flooding streets impeding traffic.
Action Area Traffic
The expected changes in climate will affect both the traffic and the transport infrastructure.
AFOK research shows that the number of road accidents inВӯ crease with temperature. The main reason for this effect is that warmer weather leads to higher use of bicycles in the urban traffic. As a consequence, under climate change conВӯ ditions we will have to improve the traffic safety especially of bicycles. Cars are less sensitive to heat stress, but more to moisture on the streets. 
Pedestrians are sensitive to heat and moisture alike. As both heat and heavy rainfall events will increase in the fuВӯ ture, the security and comfort of pedestrian traffic in Berlin has to be improved i.e. by building crossovers and putting in place shady design in public traffic space, drinking founВӯ tains or arcaded sidewalks. These will also promote public transport, as every travel with busses and trains starts and ends with a walk. Particularly exposed stations and waiting areas need climatic optimization, for example by roofing or shading. 
Already today, Berlin road surfaces suffer from heat stress. On motorways, dangerous faults are forming on very hot days (so-called вҖҳblowupsвҖҷ), the dark tar covers of city streets soften up. New road constructions and road repairs need a shift towards heat resistant surface materials. They should simultaneously cushВӯ ion the effect of rain and reflect the solar radiВӯ ation better. As part of the вҖҳsponge cityвҖҷ stratВӯ egy the Berlin road space must be also redesigned so that it can discharge rainwater peaks. For monitoring a special task force вҖҳtransport infrastructure checkвҖҷ is needed.
Measures  В„
Application of adapted road covers  В„
Adaptation of the road drainage to more heavy rains  В„
Reduction of traffic-related NOx emissions  В„
Ensuring an environmentally friendly composition of the mode of transport  В„
Improve the safety of cyclists  В„
Improve cooling in public transport  В„
Maintain safety for pedestrians  В„
Introduce Task Force transport infrastructure check
Climate change as вҖҳSmog-AmplifierвҖҷ
Climate change is associated with increased solar raВӯ diation. This leads to an augmented production of ground level ozone from the originating substances 
NO2, CO and volatile organic compounds (VOC). More than 80 percent of these substances are a by-product of internal combustion engines. Especially susceptible to elevated ozone levels are high-risk groups such as young children or people with chronic respiratory disВӯ eases. Even without the additional production of chemical precursors climate change in Berlin will lead to increased ozone pollution. If we do want to keep the ozone concentration at the current level, the motorВӯ ized individual traffic must be reduced. This is not only a climate protection requirement, but also needed for an improved climate change adaptation вҖ“ a clear exВӯ ample of synergies between both pillars of climate

[Page 23]
Fig.: 23: People looking to relax on the banks of the Spree.
Adaptation to the Impacts of Climate Change in Berlin | Vulnerabilities and Measures
Fig. 25: вҖҳDrinkmenвҖҳ вҖ“ Mobile water supply on the Carnival of Cultures.
Fig. 24: Basketball court in SchГ¶neberg
Action Area Tourism, Culture, Sports
With almost 12 million arrivals and 28.7 million overnight stays Berlin is the top tourism destination in Germany. AcВӯ cordingly, the tourism industry is an important economic sector. Berlin has GermanyвҖҳs largest and most versatile culВӯ tural programme, and many people from all over the world visit the city for exactly that reason. Sport offers in Berlin are equally overwhelming. About 600,000 people belong to one of more than 2,300 sports clubs.
Many activities in tourism, culture and sports are held outВӯ doors. They are therefore sensitive to changes in climatic conditions. On the other hand, climate change also offers clear opportunities for Berlin. The tourist season is likely to expand, and the hotel and restaurant industry could beneВӯ fit, for example by offering attractive outdoor deals, espeВӯ cially if care is taken for shading. Many outdoor areas can be longer used for sporting activities.
But there are also discernible risks. Tourists are increasingly exposed to sun and heat. They need easy-to-understand information and warning sysВӯ tems for prevention. In order to assess and manВӯ age the risks and opportunities of climate change for the Berlin tourism industry a coordinated strategy is needed along with a modified marketВӯ ing concept. At cultural and sports events a free supply of drinking water must be ensured. Here we also need to think about the relocation of opening and event times. Finally, the outdoor faВӯ cilities will be exposed to more drought and heavy rainfall events. Improved maintenance concepts and the drainage must be adjusted to the new conditions, too.
Measures  В„
Adaptation of offers in the cultural and sports area  В„
Free supply of drinking water  В„
Refreshment facilities at events  В„
Marketing concept: climate adjusted city tourism  В„
Inclusion of tourists into civil defense and early warning  В„
Improved drainage of sports fields

[Page 24]
Fig. 26, 27: High coverage between the spatial location of schools in the city (left figure, red dots) and the boosted thermal stress in certain parts of Berlin (see dark gray colored areas in the picture to the right).
Action Area Education
Education is another important sector which has been asВӯ sessed by AFOK вҖ“ for mainly two reasons. Firstly, the educaВӯ tional sector is itself vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. Secondly, the education sector plays a key role for the future perception of and coping with climate change.
The more than 2,100 institutions of early childhood educaВӯ tion and care are attended by almost 150,000 children. 
BerlinвҖҷs about 800 schools were attended by some 300,000 pupils during school year 2015/16. Due to their urge to move as well as inadequate hydration children are particuВӯ larly susceptible to heat stress. The spatial distribution of day-care centeres and schools follows the population distriВӯ bution, so that the majority of these institutions in Berlin are located in areas with already elevated temperatures (urВӯ ban heat island effect).
In order to adjust the Berlin educational sector to climate change, first the buildings must be improved: summer heat insulation, shading and natural cooling areas have to be provided. 
The outdoor areas of the schools must offer sufficient protection too. This can easily be combined with the establishment of learning and experience venues.
The organization of the (pre-) school educaВӯ tion must be made sufficiently flexible in the face of more heat events, e.g. with respect to the time-off scheme due to excessive heat, esВӯ pecially during sports hours. We also need more heat adapted food and drink offers, as well as an adaptation of rules for ahead-ofschedule school finishing times. Schools can serve as multipliers and partners for climate adaptation measures in the neighborhood. FiВӯ nally, the issues of climate change, mitigation and adaptation should become more systemВӯ atiВӯcally contents of the curriculum. Here, collaboration beВӯ tween AFOK and the education measures proposed by the 
Berlin Energy and Climate Protection Programme (BEK) is helpful. 
Measures  В„
Toughening-up of school buildings  В„
Promotion of school gardens  В„
Adaptation of the (pre-) school organisation  В„
Schools as places of exchange of experience  В„
Integration of climate adaptation in educational programmes  В„
Climate adaptation as part of BEK networks and continuation schemes  В„
Anchoring of climate adaptation in the curriculum  В„
Climate education in adult education centres  В„
Promoting education campaigns with partners

[Page 25]
Adaptation to the Impacts of Climate Change in Berlin | Making Adaptation Happen
4. Making Adaptation Happen
Implementation 
Taking the AFOK, the STEP Climate/ 
StEP Climate KONKRET, and the upВӯ dated planning reference map Berlin disposes of excellent planning and strategy bases to transform the GerВӯ man capital into a climate-proof, resilВӯ ient city. This transformation can be realised and the implementation costs are well below the damages avoided. 
Climate adaptation is therefore necesВӯ sary also from an economic perspecВӯ tive.
BerlinвҖҷs green and blue infrastructure is a great asset for this endeavor and its ecosystem services are very often provided at low or no costs. This naВӯ ture capital needs to be qualified and strengthened. In part, it can serve as a complement, if not substitute for the cityвҖҷs grey infrastructure. 
The Berlin Energy Transition Act, adopted and issued in spring 2016, provides a sound legal basis for adapВӯ tation to climate change as well. 
Now the measured proposed by AFOK need to be discussed publicly and enВӯ acted consequently. The necessary funds need to be provided in a timely manner, the cooperation between 
Senate und districts has to be expandВӯ ed while the relevant economic stakeВӯ holders and the society have to be won over to get involved. 
Monitoring 
Climate change will become more noticeable in the next years. Exactly how the climate is changing and what climate change impacts will occur in 
Berlin must be continuously observed. 
AFOK proposes a monitoring system together with sets of indicators for all action areas. They are informed by the widely known monitoring system of the OECD, differentiating between вҖҳstateвҖҷ, вҖҳimpactвҖҷ and вҖҳresponseвҖҷ indicaВӯ tors.
In addition to the observation of the urban climate, monitoring is particuВӯ larly needed when it comes to public health effects, the various impacts on ecosystems and the urban infrastrucВӯ ture. Climate and climate impact monВӯ itoring in Berlin can be build in many parts upon existing or already planned monitoring activities. 
Finally, the monitoring of the actions taken by the political and administraВӯ tive system as well as by privates is needed. It is an extra task then to also monitor the physical effects of these measures, requiring all types of indiВӯ cators and expert evaluation on top. 
Such a monitoring system is imporВӯ tant in order to be able to make adapВӯ tation to climate change itself adaptВӯ able and enable flexible responses.
Communication
Climate change in itself is a wellknown issue, but most people still do associate it more with climate protecВӯ tion (mitigation) than with adaptaВӯ tion. 
But mitigation and adaptation belong together - not only in Berlin. This needs to be communicated more inВӯ tensely. It is essential to inform the urban community about upcoming risks and to underline that action is needed вҖ“ and especially how the indiВӯ vidual can do something. 
Nationwide comparative studies show that the perception of heat related health risks is much lower in Berlin than elsewhere вҖ“ despite the fact that 
GermanyвҖҷs capital belongs to the most vulnerable regions of the whole counВӯ try. 
Adaptation communication must not only help to resolve this lacking risk awareness. Communication is also needed when it comes to motivate people for improved self-protection and more help for others. 
Unusual communication formats can be helpful here, e.g. via вҖҳstumbling blocksвҖҷ on localized climate risks in the public space, information on cool places in the city, or on adaptation competitions in the neighborhood.

[Page 26]
5. Conclusion
Climate change is already a reality and will significantly worsen in the future. Berlin, with its highly-densified areas is particularly vulnerable to the expected increase in heat events, more frequent heavy rain periods and periodically occurring dry phases.
Particularly vulnerable are the elderly, infants and chroniВӯ cally ill people. Those working outdoors and tourists are in this risk group, too. 
Here a heat early warning system and various preventive measures are needed. The rapid expansion of the public drinking fountain system is necessary. BerlinвҖҳs economy has to take structural and organizational measures to maintain labour productivity at its current levels.
Protecting critical infrastructure
The urban infrastructure is endangered and must be proВӯ tected. For several years now, the Berlin combined sewer system is upgraded through technical measures in order to reduce the environmental impacts of recurring rain water overflows. Climate change has the potential to undermine these investments by more heavy rain events. More surface storage capacities have to be created, complementing the subterranean storage facilities. BerlinвҖҷs city surface has to become more permeable via de-sealing and greening. This will also increase the surface water storage capacity, helpВӯ ing to cool the city during summer heat periods (вҖҳsponge cityвҖҷ principle).
The largely subterranean power grids of Berlin need a conВӯ tinuous climate check, as well as the traffic infrastructure. 
We need to adapt the traffic routing in such a way that the environmental alliance (pedestrians, bicycles, public transВӯ port) can continue to function well.
After all the urban nature вҖ“ forests, parks, public green areВӯ as, allotments вҖ“ need to be better protected against heat, drought and pest infestation.
Participation of all groups of the society is required!
Under the AFOK, more than 80 measures for all nine sectors under consideration were developed. If implemented, our city is well prepared for climate change. Many of them also have synergies with the Berlin Energy and Climate ProВӯ gramme (BEK), aiming at climate-neutral by 2050.
The Berlin Senate has to play a key role here along with the districts, since it has to decide and implement many of these measures. The Senate can assist in implementation, whereas the districts of Berlin should become role models for climate adaption. Adaptation should also become more anchored in the education system.
As with climate protection, the implementation of adaptaВӯ tion can only succeed if the business sector and the urban society are actively involved. After all itвҖҳs also about their own well-being.

[Page 27]
Anpassung an die Folgen des Klimawandels in Berlin | Titel des Kapitels 
Adaptation to the Impacts of Climate Change in Berlin | Conclusion and Glossary
Glossary
Adaptability: ability of a system or actor to react to changВӯ ing climatic and environmental conditions by system or changes in behaviour and thereby reduce the vulnerability. 
Adaptation to climate change can be done consciously/inВӯ tentionally or unconsciously/spontaneous.
Biodiversity: Refers to the variety of life on three different levels: (1) within species (genetic diversity), (2) between species (species diversity) and (3) between the habitats of species (ecosystems diversity).
Dehydration: In Human medicine, dehydration refers to a lack of fluid in the human body. The sensation of thirst is already to interpret as a physical signal of a negative water balance.
Unsealing of areas: reversal of the sealied area, i.e. the air- and water-tight cover of the natural soil by man-made buildings.
Exposition: The exposition of a system (i.e. sector) in relation to climate change or a particular climate signal describes how strongly the sectors are subject to climate change.
Extinction: biological term for the dying out of a species.
Green (also: blue-green) Infrastructure: Strongly promoted by the European Union the concept of вҖҳgreen infrastructureвҖҷ aims at the strengthening and regenerating of existing natВӯ ural capital. The nature-based ecosystem services вҖ“ such as water retention, cooling, improve air quality, etc. вҖ“ are in many cases able to complement or even to replace the perВӯ formance of the conventional вҖҳgray-brown infrastructureвҖҷ (that is the built infrastructure). This is due to the fact, that the green infrastructure is often more durable, more cost effective and multifunctional.
Heat stress: Strain caused by the heat on a human, animal or plant organism with a negative impact on the metaboВӯ lism, especially on the water balance (risk of dehydration).
Morbidity (also: disease recurrence): An epidemiological term for the disease rate related to a specific population.
Mortality (also: mortality rate): Demographic term for the number of deaths in a given period based on 1,000 individВӯ uals in a population.
Ecosystem Services: Direct and indirect benefits, that indiВӯ viduals or societies obtain from functioning ecosystems.
Resilience: The ability of a social or ecological system to withstand external disturbances or shocks and to resume function after longer or shorter periods of time and mainВӯ taining its structure.
Summer Smog: Summer smog (also smog, ozone smog or 
L.A. smog) refers to the load on the ground-level air by a high concentration of ozone and photochemical oxidants.
Urban heat island effect: Refers to the higher average temВӯ perature in a city compared to surrounding areas, caused mainly by the higher heating of the building and the lower air circulation in the city. It is influenced by the choice of a built-up surface, the evaporation and the air exchange. 
Vulnerability: The lost susceptibility of a system and its exВӯ posure and sensitivity to climate change (which determines its potential damage) on one side, and the adaptability on the other side.

[Page 28]
Publisher
Senate Department for Urban Development and the Environment
Am KГ¶llnischen Park 3
10179 Berlin
Expert Department
Special Unit for Climate Protection and Energy (SR KE)
The concept for adaptation to the impacts of climate change in Berlin (AFOK) was produced by the following institutions and agencies:
Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research (PIK) (Project Management) bgmr. Landscape Architects GmbH (Repesentative Project Management)
Luftbild Umwelt Planung GmbH (LUP)
Institute for Ecological Economy Research gGmbH (IГ–W)
L.I.S.T. Urban Development Corporation mbH
Recommendation for citation
Reusswig, F.; Becker, C.; Lass, W.; Haag, L.; Hirschfeld, J.; Knorr, A.; LГјdeke, M.K.B.; 
Neuhaus, A.; Pankoke, C.; Rupp, J., Walther, C.; Walz, S.; Weyer, G.; Wiesemann, E. (2016): Anpassung an die Folgen des Klimawandels in Berlin (AFOK). Klimaschutz 
Teilkonzept Zusammenfassung. Potsdam, Berlin.
Photo credits
Cover: Pixabay, pp. 6/7: L.I.S.T. Stadtentwicklungsgesellschaft mbH, p. 11: iStock, FoВӯ tolia, T. DГјmmel/A. Schubert 2015 (http://ambrosia.met.fu-berlin.de/ambrosia/ downloads/Adlershof-Ambrosia-Doku.pdf), Wikipedia, Fotolia, p. 13: Fotolia, p. 14: bgmr/SenStadtUm StEP Klima KONKRET, p. 15 Fotolia, p. 16: BWB вҖ“ Joachim Donath, foto.de (CC BY-SA 3.0), Berliner Stadtreinigungsbetriebe, p. 21: Shutterstock, p. 22: 
Fotolia, p. 23: Pixabay (above), C. Pankoke (LUP-Potsdam) (below), pp. 25, 26, 27: 
Fotolia.
Design
Translation
July 2016