[Page 1]
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN
TOWARDS A NET ZERO 
AND CLIMATE RESILIENT 
BENGALURU
Photo Credit: Praseeda Mukundan/WRI India
GHG
SUMMARY OF THE BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION 
AND RESILIENCE PLAN (BCAP)

[Page 2]
Thunderstorm
Drought
Air pollution
GHG
Stationary energy
Transportation
Waste
Adaptation/
Resilience
Social inclusion
Mitigation
Green economy
Public health
Enhanced livability
Energy & building
Water
Disaster management
Air quality
Coherence
Ownership
Monitoring
Capacity
Urban Planning, 
Greening & 
Biodiversity
Governance
Climate impact
Climate hazard

[Page 3]
Forewords
City Leaders’ Pledge for Climate Action 09 
Messages 10
Acknowledgements 12
Vision
1. Introduction
2. Approach and Guiding Framework
3. Climate Hazard Assessment
4. Vulnerability and Risk Assessment
5. Greenhouse Gas Emissions
6. Future Emission Pathways
7. Sectoral Priorities Framing of actions under BCAP I. Energy and Buildings II. Transportation III. Solid Waste IV. Air Quality V. Water, Wastewater and Storm Water VI. Urban Planning, Greening and Biodiversity VII. Disaster Management
8. BCAP Governance
9. Monitoring, Evaluation and Reporting of BCAP
Way Forward 50
Glossary 52
References 54

[Page 4]
Fig-1: Administrative jurisdictions of Bengaluru
Fig-2: Key milestones in BCAP preparation
Fig-3: Built footprint evolution across Bengaluru (Between 
1985-2019)
Fig-4: Population of Bengaluru and the surrounding region
Fig-5: Three-pronged approach for stakeholder consultations
Fig-6: Approach to formulation of the BCAP
Fig-7: Hazards identified for Bengaluru
Fig-8: River valley system of Bengaluru and the adjoining region
Fig-9: Flood risk zones in Bengaluru city
Fig-10: Average land surface temperature of the built areas of Bengaluru city
Fig-11: Change in groundwater recharge potential for 
Bengaluru Metropolitan Region 
Fig-12: Percentage change in projected air temperature based on RCP 4.5 for short and long-term epochs 
LIST OF FIGURES & TABLES
TABLES
Table-1: Key findings from Bengaluru climate/environmental hazard assessment
Table-2: Co-benefits of climate action 
Fig-13: Percentage change in projected rainfall based on 
RCP 4.5 for short-term and long-term epochs
Fig-14: Parameters used for Vulnerability and Risk 
Assessment
Fig-15: Summarising order of priority based on hazard exposure - Surface flooding, urban heat and air pollution
Fig-16: Order of priority based on sensitivity parameters
Fig-17: Order of priority based on (lack of) adaptaive capacity
Fig-18: GHG Baseline 2019 for Bengaluru (BBMP Area)
Fig-19: Inventory of carbon sequestration by trees outside forests in Bengaluru (2001 - 2022)​
Fig-20: Long-term GHG emission mitigation potential for 
Bengaluru under different scenarios
Fig-21: Sectors identified for BCAP action orientation
Fig-22: Framing of actions for BCAP
Fig-23: BCAP governance structure
Fig-24: Components of the MER framework
Fig-25: MER operational framework

[Page 5]
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
AQ: Air Quality
BBMP: Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike
BCAP: Bengaluru Climate Action and Resilience Plan 
CAC: Climate Action Cell
CCRA: Climate Change Risk Assessment
CCRA-VA: Climate Change Risk Assessment and 
Vulnerability Assessment
CHVA: Climate Hazard Vulnerability Assessment
CIRIS: Cities Inventory Reporting and Information System
CO2e: Carbon Dioxide Equivalent
DM: Disaster Management
E&B: Energy and Buildings sector
FVA: Flood Vulnerable Areas
GHG: Greenhouse Gases
GPC: Global Protocol for Community-Scale Greenhouse Gas 
Emission Inventories
ICAP: Inclusive Climate Action Plan
IEC: Information, Education and Communication
IPCC: Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
KSAPCC: Karnataka State Action Plan on Climate Change
LST: Land Surface Temperature
MER: Monitoring, Evaluation, Reporting
NCAP: National Clean Air Programme
NDC: Nationally Determined Contribution
NMT: Non Motorised Transport
PM: Particulate Matter
PT: Public Transport
RCP: Representative Concentration Pathway
SWM: Solid Waste Management
T: Transportation
UPGBD: Urban Planning, Greening and Biodiversity
W WW SW: Water, Wastewater and Stormwater
WHO: World Health Organization
WRI: World Resources Institute

[Page 6]
Shri D.K. Shivakumar 
Bengaluru Development Minister and 
Deputy Chief Minister, 
Government of Karnataka
Bengaluru, the capital of Karnataka and one of the fastest growing cities in India, holds a unique position in the country’s urban landscape. The city is one of the largest attractors of talent globally, with a strong innovation and startup ecosystem. Bengaluru, historically known as the Garden City of India, has gradually become the 
Silicon Valley of India, being one of the largest hubs of Information Technology companies in the world. 
While the city has been proactive in formulating progressive policies to manage its growth, it is not insulated from the perils of growth. The pressure of urbanisation has not only impacted the natural resources and ecological networks in the city-region, but its effect can be felt in the city’s liveability conditions. At the same time, the growing concern over climate change and its impact on cities has added a sense of urgency to our efforts to enhance Brand Bengaluru as one of the most liveable and inclusive cities in the world and a preferred investment destination. 
The Government of Karnataka, together with Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP), in an effort to tackle these challenges and reiterate its commitment to the shared international goal to limit global warming and uphold the Paris Agreement as a member of the C40 cities, is pleased to put forward the first ever Bengaluru 
Climate Action and Resilience Plan (BCAP). Developing an actionable roadmap to mitigate and adapt to climate change, and to build better resilience, is a priority of the government of Karnataka, and must be seen as a human development agenda. Over the next few years, the BCAP will be implemented as a multi-sectoral collaborative effort, drawing participation from various departments of the Government of Karnataka, civil society and the private sector. 
Launching a roadmap for climate action for Bengaluru is a strategically significant step for the state of Karnataka. 
With 1 in 7 persons in the state living in Bengaluru, and given the city’s forward and backward linkages in the state and national economy, the BCAP is going to positively impact not just the citizens of Bengaluru, but many more lives. I am confident that Bengaluru will emerge as a lighthouse not only for other cities in Karnataka and 
India, but as a global example of inclusive climate action. 
FOREWORD

[Page 7]
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN
Smt. Vandita Sharma
Chief Secretary to Government,
Government of Karnataka
FOREWORD
As per the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Sixth Assessment Report (AR6), with every increment in global warming, regional changes in the mean climate and extremes become more widespread and pronounced. Adverse impacts from climate change will continue to intensify in future. India’s updated Nationally 
Determined Contribution (NDC) is a milestone in this effort, and seeks to enhance the country’s contributions towards strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change, as per the Paris Agreement. The 
Government of Karnataka is committed to being a frontrunner in helping the country embark on low-emission and resilient pathways. Cities are the engines of economic growth, and it is high time that they take up the mantle. I am happy to see that Bengaluru is already championing this effort, with the Bengaluru Climate Action and Resilience Plan (BCAP). With the launch of the BCAP, it will become one of the few cities in the world, and the third in India, to have a global standard Climate Action Plan. 
Spearheaded by the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP), the BCAP is Bengaluru’s first data-driven, multi-stakeholder collaborative exercise to address its GHG mitigation and climate change adaptation challenges. The goals, targets and actions recommended by this plan provide clear pathways to achieve a net zero and climate-resilient Bengaluru. As it is the largest city of Karnataka, its plan is sure to provide a roadmap to other cities in the state to act against climate change. 
For any plan to be successful it is imperative that all stakeholders take ownership. The successful implementation of the BCAP would require coordination and coherence amongst government departments, civil society organisations, NGOs, research organisations and, most importantly, citizens. With every actor playing their part in turning this plan into reality, I am optimistic that the city will transform its challenges into opportunities.

[Page 8]
Shri Rakesh Singh, IAS
Additional Chief Secretary to Government,
Urban Development Department,
Government of Karnataka
FOREWORD
Climate change is one of the biggest challenges that cities are grappling with in the 21st century, and thus it must be addressed to achieve the mission of sustainable and inclusive urban development. With the successful adoption and launch of the Climate Action and Resilience Plan (BCAP), Bengaluru can become a model for other cities and towns in Karnataka to become climate-progressive. 
Bengaluru is the largest of Karnataka's 10 municipal corporations. Therefore, the scale and complexity of the challenges it faces are mammoth. Apart from the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP), there are multiple departments and agencies responsible for providing different types of services and planning for the city. These include the Bengaluru Electricity Supply Company Limited (BESCOM), Bangalore Water Supply and 
Sewerage Board (BWSSB), Bengaluru Metropolitan Transport Corporation (BMTC), Bangalore Metro Rail 
Corporation Limited (BMRCL), Bangalore Development Authority (BDA), and the Disaster Management 
Department. Climate action is an agenda that cuts across sectors. The goals, targets, and actions for greenhouse gas mitigation and resilience-building set by the BCAP have been developed in consultation and consensus with all relevant agencies. It is now incumbent on us to deliver on the ambitious targets set by BCAP with the utmost sincerity. 
The Urban Development Department of the Government of Karnataka is committed to supporting the BBMP and all other key stakeholder departments and agencies in implementing the BCAP with highest level of coordination and coherence. The momentous effort put in preparing the BCAP will only be realised on the ground when all the stakeholders working in and for Bengaluru align with each other. I hope this effort will set a precedent for other cities in Karnataka and the rest of the country in making cities plan and deliver on climate action commitments.

[Page 9]
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN
Shri Tushar Girinath
Chief Commissioner,
Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike
Bengaluru, the capital of Karnataka and the fifth largest city in India, is among the handful of cities across the globe to decisively declare its commitment to tackle climate change. Bengaluru joined the C40 cities network in 
2017, and is committed to contribute its fair share to limit warming to 1.5 degrees, while being equally committed to prepare itself to adapt to climate change impacts. The city is also the co-lead of the Global Air Quality Network. 
By presenting the Bengaluru Climate Action and Resilience Plan (BCAP), we reaffirm the city’s commitment to fight climate change for Bengaluru’s citizens, for our country and, in the true spirit of a 21st century city, for the global community.
The BCAP is not a mere document, but a firm step towards charting a roadmap for the city - informed by data, research, the best available knowledge practices and, most importantly, lived experiences. With this plan, 
Bengaluru has embarked on an ambitious journey to reduce GHG emissions in line with the commitment given by the Govt of India to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. Our endeavour will be to achieve these long-term emission reduction targets by implementing BCAP actions within the framework of the relevant policies of the Govt of India. The BBMP will endeavour to actively pursue the policies and to contribute more to arrest the climate change. 
An evaluation of BCAP goals and targets will be done every three years, based on insights provided by monitoring exercises described in the previous section. The goals and targets will be revised if required based on the evaluation exercise. The entire BCAP will be revisited every five years, based on updated evidence and progress on goals set.
As we adopt and start the implementation of the BCAP, it is important to internalise the plan’s intent in letter and spirit, in the policies, processes and practices of planning, managing and governing the city. While the Bruhat 
Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike, along with all the key departments of the Government of Karnataka working in and for the city, will lead the implementation of the plan from the front, the BCAP can only be a success with participation from and partnerships, which include citizens and civil society, knowledge institutions, and the private sector. With the adoption of the BCAP, Bengaluru takes yet another leap towards securing a healthy, safe, and resilient urban future for its citizens. 
I thank C40 Cities and WRI India for their stewardship in developing the BCAP for Bengaluru.
CITY LEADERS’ PLEDGE FOR CLIMATE ACTION

[Page 10]
Ms. Shruti Narayan,
Regional Director, South and West Asia,
C40 cities
MESSAGE
Bengaluru, the fifth most populous urban agglomeration in India, has been a C40 city since 2017, committing to accelerated climate action as a part of C40’s Leadership Standards. Integral to this, Bengaluru has now published its 
Climate Action and Resilience Plan (BCAP) committing to playing its fair role in reducing carbon emissions, thereby setting a roadmap to becoming carbon neutral by 2050 aligned with the Paris Agreement and also contributing to 
India’s NDCs and the target of carbon neutrality by 2070. 
The Bengaluru Climate Action and Reslience Plan is data-driven based on a GHG inventory of 2019-2020, that sets clear yet achievable targets, of 16% by 2030, 26% by 2040 and 56% by 2050 and further endeavours to work towards achieving net zero by 2050 in line with the extended scenario (34% by 2030, 58% by 2040, and 91% reduction by 
2050). This is an important milestone for Bengaluru and an inspiration for cities in the Global South, leading the way in demonstrating how political commitment and leadership bringing diverse stakeholders in the discussions, can result in an ambitious yet implementable climate action plan. 
A critical component of the BCAP is to build resilience to immediate and future climate risks and address inclusive climate actions by putting health and economic recovery by creating jobs at the forefront. The BCAP has been developed on consensus, collaboration and coherence with national, state and city policies and actions. The Urban 
Development Department, GoK and Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP), with strategic support from 
WRI India and C40 Cities, have led from the front on many of these discussions and helped frame the key priorities that can enable this transition. We look forward to continuing our engagement with BBMP along with the State 
Government and other institutions in the implementation and delivery of targets set out to create a Resilient and 
Liveable Bengaluru.

[Page 11]
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN
Ms. Jaya Dhindaw
Director, WRI India Ross Center, and 
Executive Program Director, Sustainable Cities, 
WRI India
MESSAGE 
Bengaluru, one of the world’s largest innovation hubs, and fastest growing economies, is a favoured destination for investors and talent alike. In the phase of pandemic recovery, the city has been through a lot, given the hectic pace of growth and the continuous onslaught of extreme climate events. In this context, the Bengaluru Climate Action and 
Resilience Plan (BCAP) provides a decisive and inclusive stance on climate action, training its lens on fore-fronting interconnected actions that are beneficial for people, nature and climate. 
The BCAP is unprecedented because the solutions it suggests, to address Bengaluru’s vulnerabilities and strengthen climate resilient growth, are highly data and evidence-based. Furthermore, it also takes into account ground realities based on multiple deliberations with citizens and public agencies. 
The Plan sets clear goals, targets, and actions across seven key sectors: Energy and buildings, transport, solid waste, water and wastewater, air quality, urban planning, greening and biodiversity, and disaster resilience. The recommendations offered in the Plan span institutional mechanisms and regulations, to infrastructure development, finance and capacity. The BCAP is a valuable opportunity to drive coherence across sectors and agencies towards delivering outcomes and impact on the ground. The plan interfaces with multiple disciplines and is therefore, wellequipped to inform policy and complementary action by a varied range of stakeholders to shape a liveable and thriving city. 
As we focus on reducing emissions, inequities and restoring nature, there are reasons for optimism, as Bengaluru is only the third city in India with a climate action plan adhering to global standards and will play a pivotal role in 
India’s transition towards climate proofing its citizens and economy.
Climate-resilient, sustainable, well-planned urban development, reduces inequality, improves inclusion, and enables better quality of life, while respecting planetary boundaries. WRI India looks forward to supporting Bengaluru in achieving its goal of pursuing low-carbon, just, equitable and resilient growth, and safeguarding the future of 
Bengalureans through collective climate-positive actions.

[Page 12]
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We sincerely thank the C40 Cities team for giving us the opportunity and guiding the city throughout the process of preparing the Bengaluru Climate Action and Resilience Plan (BCAP). We express our gratitude to 
WRI India for supporting the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike as a knowledge partner in preparing the 
BCAP since its inception and throughout its development and until the final approval stage. We thank all the stakeholder agencies, especially the nodal officers, who supported us with data, time, resources and suggestions. 
We appreciate the support received from all the officials from BBMP, including its zonal and ward offices, who participated in the development of the BCAP. We thank all the experts, practitioners, and members of academia and civil society for their valuable time in making the preparation of the BCAP a multi-stakeholder consultative exercise. We express our gratitude to all the advisors and reviewers from C40 Cities and WRI India. Specifically, we would like to thank all the individuals, authors, the support teams and organisations listed below, for their unconditional support and contributions to the BCAP.
Government of Karnataka
Smt. Vandita Sharma, IAS, Chief Secretary
Shri Rakesh Singh, IAS, Additional Chief Secretary to Government, Urban Development Department
Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike
Shri Tushar Giri Nath, IAS, Chief Commissioner
Dr. Harish Kumar K, IAS, Special Commissioner-Administration and Solid Waste Management
Shri Basavaraj Kabade, Chief General Manager & Chief Engineer, BSWML; Nodal Officer of BCAP from BBMP 
Dr. Rohini Balasubramanian, Nodal Officer (formerly associated)
WRI India
Project Coordinator
Jaya Dhindaw, Director, WRI India Ross Center, and Executive Program Director, Sustainable Cities
Authors
Shrimoyee Bhattacharya, Program Lead - Urban Development 
Praseeda Mukundan, Senior Program Research Associate - Urban Development
Nanduri Prashanti, Senior Program Research Associate – Urban Development
Chetan Venkataramana Naika, Senior Program Associate - Urban Development
Sruthi Subbanna, Senior Program Research Associate - Urban Development
Bhanu Khanna, Program Manager - Geo Analytics
Radha Chanchani, Senior Manager - Urban Development 
Dr. Priya Narayanan, Senior Program Manager - Urban Development
Abhimanyu S, Program Associate - Geo Analytics
Linda Regi, Program Associate - Geo Analytics
Raj Bhagat Palanichamy, Senior Program Manager - Geo Analytics

[Page 13]
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN
Contributors
Deepak Krishnan, Deputy Director - Energy
Sumedha Malaviya, Senior Manager - Energy
Sahana Goswami, Senior Program Manager – Urban Water Resilience
Rohan Rao, Program Lead - Electric Mobility
Sudeept Maiti, Associate Program Director – Transport (formerly associated)
Aloke Mukherjee, Manager - Transport
Bhavay Sharma, Senior Program Manager - Air Quality
Ajay Nagpure, Director - Air Quality (formerly associated)
Bina Shetty, Program Head - Spatial Data and Data Analytics
Jyoti, Program Associate - Geo Analytics
Harsha K, Junior Program Associate - Geo Analytics
Aditya Khare, Program Associate - Geo Analytics
Sumedha Jain, Program Manager - Urban Development
Design & Communications
Rama Thoopal, Program Communications Lead
Nileena S, Senior Communications Associate - Geo Analytics
Safia Zahid, Communications Manager
Abhinand Pulijala, Senior Program Communications Associate - Geo Analytics
Anhad Imaan, Senior Program Communications Associate
C40 Cities
Shruti Narayan, Regional Director for South and West Asia Region
Benjamin John, City Advisor, Chennai and Bengaluru
Akshatha Venkatesha, Inclusive Climate Action City Adviser, Bengaluru
Max Jamieson, Head of Climate Action Planning
Ryan Green, Senior Technical Manager, Climate Action Planning
Siyasanga Sauka, Head of Adaptation Planning
Kirsty Griffin, Senior Technical Manager, Adaptation Planning
Zoe Chafe, Technical Lead, Air Quality
Helen Ho, Programme Manager, Air Quality Technical Assistance
Toby Coombes, Project Manager, Air Quality Policy and Analysis
Vivian Pun, Senior Technical Advisor, Air Quality and Health
Surya Srinivas Boddu, Former Technical Advisor Air Quality Copy edited and proofed by Rama Thoopal and Uma Asher

[Page 14]
List of stakeholder departments/agencies consulted
Bangalore Development Authority (BDA)
Bangalore Electricity Supply Company Limited (BESCOM)
Bangalore Water Supply & Sewerage Board (BWSSB)
Bengaluru Metro Rail Corporation Limited (BMRCL)
Bengaluru City Police
Bengaluru Solid Waste Management Limited (BSWML)
Bengaluru Traffic Police Department
Bengaluru Metropolitan Transport Corporation (BMTC)
Central Ground Water Board (CGWB)
Commissionerate of Health and Family Welfare
Department of Industries and Commerce
Directorate of Urban Land Transport (DULT)
District Disaster Management Authority (under Revenue Department) 
Environmental Management and Policy Research Institute (EMPRI)
GAIL (India) Limited 
Ground Water Directorate (GWD)
India Meteorological Department (IMD)
Indian Institute of Science (IISc)
Karnataka Biodiversity Board
Karnataka Forest Department
Karnataka Power Corporation Limited (KPCL) 
Karnataka Power Transmission Corporation Limited (KPTCL)
Karnataka Renewable Energy Development Limited (KREDL)
Karnataka Solar Power Development Corporation Limited (KSPDCL)
Karnataka State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB) 
Karnataka State Remote Sensing Applications Centre (KSRSAC)
Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation (KSRTC)
Karnataka State Natural Disaster Monitoring Centre (KSNDMC)
Karnataka Transport Department
MSME Development Institute (DI)
Petroleum Planning and Analysis Cell (PPAC)
Power Company of Karnataka Limited (PCKL)
Rail Infrastructure Development Company (Karnataka) Limited (KRIDE)
The Energy & Resources Institute (TERI)
Urban Development Department 
Water Resource Department (WRD)

[Page 15]
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN ‘Urban systems are critical for achieving deep emissions reductions and advancing climate resilient development, particularly when this involves integrated planning that incorporates physical, natural and social infrastructure (high confidence).’
The Bengaluru Climate Action and Resilience Plan (BCAP) foregrounds human wellbeing in the city’s fight against climate change through its commitment to tackle contributors and impact of climate change with equal priority, both of which have profound consequence on shaping Bengaluru’s transition to a future that is just, resilient, inclusive and equitable. 
BCAP acknowledges that the window of opportunity for securing a livable future for Bengaluru is rapidly closing and the choices we make today will determine the choices we leave for future citizens of Bengaluru. BCAP sets ambitious goals for mitigating GHG emissions (in line with the commitment given by the Govt of India to the 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change) and enhance Bengaluru’s resilience by propelling adjustments in ecological, social or economic systems of the city in response to risks posed by climate change.
BCAP acknowledges the 2070 net zero goal set by India's Nationally Determined Contributions. Bengaluru, as the hub of innovation and start-ups, with access to advanced knowledge and resources, and home to a thriving civil society, intends to lead the way by setting more ambitious targets and implementing innovative solutions to help achieve India's declared climate goals, and at the same time become an incubator of climate solutions which could be replicated by other cities. 
Enshrining a three-pronged priority of human wellbeing, natural protection and economic growth, the pathways for achieving climate goals for the city are based on the following three pillars of success:​
Consensus: Build informed conversation among all actors as a continuous process during preparation and implementation of BCAP and beyond .
Collaboration: Catalyse radical partnerships with both state and non-state stakeholders for implementation of actions
Coherence: Ensure interdependencies of policies, plans, processes and practices are well-addressed to ensure sustainability of actions.
We believe that BCAP will provide a much-needed climate-progressive roadmap for Bengaluru. 
VISION: TOWARDS A NET ZERO AND 
CLIMATE RESILIENT BENGALURU
Synthesis Report of the IPCC Sixth Assessment Report (AR6), 2023​

[Page 16]
INTRODUCTION 
Figure 2 | Key milestones in BCAP preparation
CHAPTER 1
Bengaluru, formerly Bangalore, is the fifth most populous urban agglomeration and one of the fastest growing metropolises in India (Census 2011). The capital, and the most primate city in Karnataka, 
Bengaluru accommodates about 39% of the total urban population of the state. 
Located in the south-east of Karnataka, at an altitude of approximately 920 metres above mean sea level, the city is part of the Cauvery-Ponnaiyar (also known as Dakshin Pinakini) river basins. Bengaluru is an intrinsic network of watersheds, lakes and green spaces bestowed with rich biodiversity and natural resources (Eswar and Roy 2018).
Originally a cantonment town and a manufacturing hub, the city has gradually transformed into a major economic centre, attracting businesses and talent within India and abroad as well. By the early 2000s, 
Bengaluru came to be known as the Silicon Valley of 
India, producing the largest share of India’s information technology jobs and exports. A thriving center of knowledge and innovation, Bengaluru has emerged as a leading start-up hub in recent years.
At present, the jurisdiction of the Bruhat Bengaluru 
Mahanagara 
Palike (BBMP), the municipal corporation of the city, covers an area of about 713 sq. kms. (BBMP, 2019). In 2011, the population of BBMP was 85 lakhs (Census 2011).
Being a member of the C40 Cities network and a signatory to Deadline 2020, Bengaluru is committed to mitigating the impact of climate change, while strengthening the adaptative capacity of the city’s people, economy and nature – to build local resilience against climate change hazards.
Source: WRI India analysis using Census 2011; BBMP; BMRDA, Government of 
Karnataka
Figure 1 | Administrative jurisdictions of Bengaluru
Bengaluru’s Climate Action and Resilience Plan (BCAP) gives the city the opportunity to intensify and coordinate efforts towards planning and managing rapid urban growth in a manner that is climate-aware and aligned to the global climate agenda and India’s 
Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs).

[Page 17]
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN
Figure 3 | Built footprint evolution across Bengaluru (Between 1985-2019)
Source: WRI India analysis using World Settlement Footprint (WSF) Evolution 1985-2015, and WSF 2019; German Aerospace Center (DLR)
Between 1991 to 2019, the population within BBMP grew by 25% even as the city’s built-up footprint increased by 170% between 1985-2015. The estimated population of BBMP was 10 million in 2019 (BBMP 
2019), which is projected to almost double by 2050.
 
The municipal corporation area comprises of eight zones and 198 wards. The city’s growth has brought opportunities for development across many fronts. 
At the same time, the city is facing complex challenges as climate change shapes the growth pathways for cities globally.
Source: WRI India analysis using Census 2011, BBMP, RSP 2031- BMRDA
Figure 4 | Population of Bengaluru and the surrounding region
Airport
Railway
Railway Station
Major Road
Water body
BBMP Boundary
Year of addition of built:
1985
2019
Legend
The city has grown rapidly, since the 1990s, resulting in an almost three-fold expansion of the municipal corporation area in 2007.

[Page 18]
APPROACH AND GUIDING FRAMEWORK 
CHAPTER 2
Three pillars anchor the overarching approach adopted in the preparation of the BCAP – commitment, evidence and action-based planning. 
Guided by the C40 Cities Climate Action Planning 
Framework, the BCAP addresses four essential components of meaningful climate action.
• 
Emission reduction/neutrality: Developing a baseline for city greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and creating a pathway to achieve emission neutrality by 2050, including ambitious interim targets. 
• 
Climate change risk and vulnerability reduction: Assessing the city's climate change risks and vulnerabilities, along with planning for adaptation and resilience to climate hazards in current and future scenarios. 
• 
Governance and collaboration: Defining city governance, roles, and capacities while identifying key partners to accelerate mitigation targets and resilience goals. 
• 
Inclusivity and benefits: Engaging the community in the planning process, outlining social, environmental, and economic benefits of the plan, and ensuring fair distribution of benefits to the city's population. to the city's population.
The approach to analytics, action framing and prioritization in the BCAP enshrines three key tenets of a thriving and sustainable city – i.e., human wellbeing, natural protection and economic growth.
The BCAP is aligned with international, national and subnational goals and frameworks that Bengaluru, 
Karnataka and India have committed to, including 
Karnataka’s State Action Plan on Climate Change (KSAPCC) and India’s revised Nationally Determined 
Contributions (NDCs) among others.
Methodologies and Tools Used
Specific methodologies guide different steps of the 
BCAP preparation to ensure inclusivity in process, policy and impact. Broadly, the GHG Inventory for the city has been developed adhering to the Global 
Protocol for Community-scale Greenhouse Gas 
Emission Inventories (GPC). For assessment of risk from climate induced hazards, the study used the 
Climate Change Risk Assessment (CCRA) framework developed by C40 and a Climate Hazard Vulnerability 
Assessment (CHVA) Framework developed by WRI 
India. An inclusive climate action planning approach has been followed to address equity and inclusivity. 
Figure 5 | Three-pronged approach for stakeholder consultations
BCAP Geographic Scope: Area under BBMP (713 sq. kms.) 
Base Year: 2019 
Horizon Year: 2050 (Interim horizon periods – 2030 and 
2040) 
Data sources: As shared by relevant government departments/agencies, published by reliable sources such as Census of India, published plans, reports, papers, articles etc. 
Scope for reporting GHG emissions and future emission pathways: BASIC level (as per GPC reporting framework) which includes the sectors Stationary Energy, 
Transportation and Waste
Source: As identified by BBMP with the technical support of WRI India

[Page 19]
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN
Figure 6 | Approach to formulation of the BCAP
Source: Collated by WRI India in consultation with BBMP & C40 Cities

[Page 20]
the two major climate variables, i.e., rainfall and air temperature, manifest into four types of climatic hazards:
a) Urban flooding b) Urban heat c) Drought (water scarcity) d) Thunderstorms and lightning
Air pollution is an associated anthropogenic environmental hazard which also poses a threat to 
Bengaluru’s environment (Refer to Fig-7 for the conceptual diagram of climate hazard identification). 
A detailed assessment of the above-mentioned hazards is provided in Chapter 3 of the BCAP Report and Chapter 4 of the CCRA-VA Report. Each hazard identified, is defined by a set of criteria based on the hydro-meteorological variables, physical events, or trends that depict deviations from the long-term averages. The findings from contributing factors, frequency, intensity, extremities and exposure of the city’s geographic area and population to these hazards are detailed in Table-1.
CLIMATE HAZARD ASSESSMENT
CHAPTER 3
In the context of climate change impacts, risks result from dynamic interactions between climate-related hazards with the exposure and vulnerability of the affected human or ecological system. (IPCC 2022b)
Source: Adapted from C40’s CCRA Framework and WRI India’s CHVA Framework
Figure 7 | Hazards identified for Bengaluru 
Bengaluru experiences a tropical savanna climate that is moderate through most of the annual cycle. 
Like many other Indian cities, Bengaluru is also exposed to climate change but there are some unique aspects that impact the city, given its geographical context and river-valley systems (See Fig-8).
The city of Bengaluru is divided by the larger Cauvery and Ponnaiyar river basins across a central ridge running from north to south, as illustrated in Fig-8. 
Bengaluru's topography further subdivides it into a distinct network of streams and valley systems in synergy with the basin systems. The interlinkage between the larger river basins and valley systems influences two key aspects: availability of freshwater and natural drainage. Therefore, resilience-building against water scarcity and floods in Bengaluru needs to go beyond city limits, and should be informed by the interdependence between climatic parameters, topographical landscape and resource availability.
For Bengaluru, the extended effects of extremes in

[Page 21]
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN
Table 1 | Key findings from the Bengaluru Climate/Environmental Hazard Assessment
• Based on IMD classification of 24-hour accumulated rainfall, Bangalore Urban District (BUD) experienced 282 Heavy and 14 
Very Heavy rain events per year on average between 2016 and 2021. These rainfall events contributed to nearly 11%, of the total annual average rainfall received in the area for the study period.
• Most of the heavy rainfall events are observed in the south-western part of the district. Similarly, spatial distribution of days with consecutive (lasting two days or more) of rather heavy or moderate rainfall shows its high concentration in the 
Vrishabhavathi valley within BBMP. 
• KSNDMC has reported 1,167 flood events between 2013 and 2020, based on which 372 Flood Vulnerable Areas (FVAs) have been identified in the city. 
• Flood risk zones, categorised as ‘High, Medium, and Low’ based on the composites of various inundation extents and prevalent rainfall scenarios, house about 6%, 4% and 11% of the city population, respectively. Refer to Fig-9 for details. 
• The mean air temperature has been rising at 0.23°C per decade since 1975 in the city, with a more profound increase in the last decade (since 2009) at nearly half-a-degree rise. 
• Bengaluru faces extreme air temperature conditions such as Heat Wave and Extreme Heat Wave days, at an average of 60 days per year (as per the analysis between 1975-2022). Notably, in 2014 and 2015 the city experienced extreme heat wave conditions for more than one-third of the year, as these events continue to rise throughout the period of analysis. 
• Between the rural areas outside BBMP limits, and urban areas within BBMP boundaries, average night-time Land Surface 
Temperature (LST) varies by more than 1.5°C. Areas with well-planned residential layouts, such as Jayanagar, Koramanga­ la, and Halasuru have relatively lower summer average LSTs, in contrast to areas like Peenya, Hebbal, Nagarabhavi, and 
Chickpet, which have higher LSTs of about 35-36°C. Refer to Fig-10 for details. 
Source: Exaggerated relief visualisation; WRI India using Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SRTM) (refer to CCRA-VA report for details)
Figure 8 | River valley system of Bengaluru and the adjoining region
BBMP Boundary
State Boundary
Above Mean Sea Level:
(in metres)
River Network
Water Body >950 m <650 m
Basin boundary
Urban Heat
Temperature trends, extreme heat events, and urban heat islands
Urban Flooding
Extreme Rainfall Events
Climate/Environmental Hazard
Contributing factors assessed

[Page 22]
• Gaps and inconsistencies in pollutant observations remain a challenge in monitoring air quality trends. 
• Both PM10 and PM2.5 concentrations were the highest between October and May during the study period of 2016-21. The pollutant concentrations remain the highest for the morning and evening peak hours across all monitoring stations. 
• Bapuji Nagar, Jayanagar 5th Block, and Peenya are the stations which have crossed the daily CPCB permissible limits for 
PM2.5 for more than one-third of the year 2021 - 58%, 36% and 34%, respectively. Areas such as Majestic, Silk Board and 
Peenya cross the annual PM10 permissible limits for most of the years between 2016 and 2021. 
• Households at risk of exposure to indoor pollution due to the most polluting cooking fuel (firewood and chips), are predom­ inantly located in the ¬wards of Nayandahalli, Jakkuru and Kuvempu Nagar, as per Census 2011. 
• Under the current policy landscape and projected population and economic growth, ambient PM2.5 levels in Bengaluru is projected to increase to 45.9 µg/m3 by 2050, exceeding national air quality standards and resulting in air that contains 9 times the concentration of air pollution that the WHO deems safe. 
• The occurrence of thunderstorms is usually accompanied by other severe weather occurrences such as heavy rain and floods, hail and lightning, etc. For the period from 1981 to 2010, as per IMD, an average of 44 days of thunderstorms occurred over Bengaluru annually. 
• Karnataka saw a 68.74% rise in lightning strikes as per the Annual Lightning Report of 2021-22. 
Air Pollution
Outdoor air pollution: Particulate (PM10 and PM2.5) and gaseous pollutants; 
Indoor air pollution: Particulate Matter (PM2.5); Pathways-Air Quality Assessment for PM2.5
• Based on IMD rainfall data for the period from 1985 to 2020, nearly 50% area upstream to Cauvery has meteorological drought probability of >20% indicating higher risk for meteorological drought. Overall, based on the water resource avail­ ability and usage, 84% the study area is associated with the ‘Very High Risk’ of drought category.
• 31% area within BBMP is assessed to have declined in GRP during the years from 2000 to 2020. Refer to Fig-11 for details.
• Most groundwater observation wells within BBMP limits show a decline in groundwater levels in the pre-monsoon period, between 1993 and2021. The current stage of groundwater extraction in more than half of BMRDA limits, including the BBMP area¬, for the year 2020, is defined as ‘Over Exploited’. 
Thunderstorms and 
Lightning
Annual occurrence, average duration 
Drought
Region-level drought risk, probability, and stage of groundwater development; 
Groundwater Recharge Potential (GRP); Groundwater quality
Climate/Environmental Hazard
Contributing factors assessed

[Page 23]
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN
Figure 9 | Flood risk zones in Bengaluru city
Source: WRI India analysis using topography from SRTM, rainfall from IMD (refer to CCRA-VA report for details)
Airport
Major Road
Water body
BBMP Boundary
Above Mean Sea Level:
(in metres)
Flood Risk Zones:
Low
Medium
High ≥1000 m ≤800 m
River Basin Boundary

[Page 24]
Figure 10 | Average land surface temperature of the built areas of Bengaluru city (for summer months 2017-2021)
Source: WRI India analysis using Landsat-8, USGS/ NASA (refer to CCRA-VA report for details)
Airport
Railway
Railway Station
Major Road
Water body
BBMP Boundary
Land Surface Temperature:
32 °C

[Page 25]
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN
Figure 11 | Change in groundwater recharge potential for Bengaluru Metropolitan Region
Source: WRI India analysis using Landsat 8 (USGS/NASA), ASTER DEM (NASA), Groundwater Directorate (Government of Karnataka). Refer to CCRA-VA report for details.
Water body
BBMP
Percentage change in Groundwater Recharge 
Potential between the year 2000 and 2020:
-20%
20%
BDA
BMRDA
State Boundary
District Boundary

[Page 26]
Projected Scenarios for Air Temperature and Rainfall: Findings from Representative 
Concentration Pathways 
Temperature and Rainfall are the two critical climatic parameters that can alter larger hydro-meteorological conditions and resource balances of the region. For BCAP, these climatic parameters were studied for the 
Cauvery-Ponnaiyar river basin.
Figure 12 | Percentage change in projected air temperature based on RCP 4.5 for short and long-term epochs
21 General circulation models
Average minimum air temperature percentage change of all models
21 General circulation models
Average maximum air temperature percentage change of all models
For a city like Bengaluru, with extreme dependence on a shared water basin that meets most of its water demand, it is essential to analyse these scenarios to understand the future probable extent of the deviations from the baseline. While there is a huge range of variation between the projections based on multiple models across temperature and rainfall trends, the increased variance indicates higher chances for extreme events.
Rising air temperatures, both minimum and maximum, are seen in the findings across nearly all the models amongst both RCP 4.5 and RCP 6 as analysed. This can exacerbate health and livelihood risks of the population and productivity in the region in combination with pollution, rainfall variability, and localised socio-economic vulnerabilities.
Results from rainfall projections, variations and direction of change, along with average rainfall changes, lack accuracy and consistency amongst models for both RCP 4.5 and RCP 6 as rainfall is highly seasonal and subject to local conditions. 
However, all models largely point at an increase in variation extent, leading to greater possibilities of both wetter and drier periods. 
To support decision-making with evidence-based planning for adaptation measures against climate change-induced hazards, a better understanding of the usability of localised (granular) climate projections and monitoring station information within the institutional context is a must.
Percentage Change in Maximum Air Temperature from Historic Baseline
Percentage Change in Minimum Air Temperature from Historic Baseline
Source: WRI India analysis using ECMWF ERA5, and NEX-GDDP (NASA) processed in Google Earth Engine (refer to CCRA-VA report for details)

[Page 27]
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN
Figure 13 | Percentage change in projected rainfall based on RCP 4.5 for short-term and long-term epochs (select GCMs)
Model MIROC - ESM -CHEM
Short-term (2021-2050)
Long-term (2071-2100)
Model NorESM1 -M
Short-term (2021-2050)
Long-term (2071-2100)
River
Basin
State Boundary
Water Body
National Boundary
BBMP Boundary
Legend
Percentage difference between baseline and projected epochs:
No change <=-15
-12 to -10
10-15 >20
Source: WRI India analysis using ECMWF ERA5, and NEX-GDDP (NASA) processed in Google Earth Engine (refer to CCRA-VA report for details)

[Page 28]
VULNERABILITY AND RISK ASSESSMENT
CHAPTER 4
Vulnerability is a function of exposure, sensitivity, and adaptive capacity. The indicators in the vulnerability assessment can be used as the baseline for monitoring the socio-economic status of the identified communities, and also to evaluate potential adaptive strategies and measures.
The analysis presented in this chapter covers four prime components mentioned below as per the three verticals of Climate Hazard Risk as shown in Fig-14.
• 
Performance of key demographic parameters and their spatial distribution including age, male and female ratio, literacy, ability, social composition.
• 
Socio-economic status of people basis informal settlements, home ownership, condition of housing, assets providing access to information, affordability, and livelihood.
• 
People's ease of access to various segments of services and infrastructure – electricity, clean cooking fuel, water supply, sanitation, transport, emergency services such as health care, and fire services, and social infrastructure such as schools, public parks, playgrounds and other open green spaces. 
• 
Probable impact on each of the listed sectors across the five identified hazards - Water and 
Wastewater, Storm Water Management, Solid 
Waste 
Management, 
Transport, 
Energy 
Efficiency and Green Buildings, and Urban 
Planning, Greening and Biodiversity.
Source: : WRI India, adapted from C40’s CCRA Framework and WRI India’s 
CHVA Framework
Figure 14 | Parameters used for Vulnerability and 
Sensitivity Analysis: Highlights of demographic and socio-economic parameters used (*) City-wide averages from Census 2011 
89% effective literacy rate
85% female literacy rate.
37% of households own their home.
26% of house­ holds have temporary roofing material.
257 notified slums with a population of more than 3 lakh.
The long-term evidence driven hazard identification, and corresponding hazard exposure and impact, along with sensitivity and adaptative capacity paraments results aggregated at ward and zone level are illustrated in Fig-14 as climate hazard risk. This report does not conclude risk informed by vulnerability with a quantitative score, as ‘Vulnerability’ is a relative measure. 
Risk Assessment
*
*
*

[Page 29]
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN
Adaptive capacity assessment: Key Highlights of accessibility parameters used (*) City-wide averages from Census 2011 (**) City-wide statistics based on population derived using Census 2011 and recent amenities data available from public sources.
(***) WRI India analysis using BBMP Landuse Data 
98% of households have access to gridded electricity as the main source of lighting.
79% of households use clean cooking fuel.
19% of households do not have drinking water facility within the prem­ ises.
97% of households have latrines within the premises.
25% of the city’s pop­ ulation can access metro stations within 10 minutes' walking distance .
94% of the city’s pop­ ulation can access to a bus stop within a 5 minute walking distance.
32% people have access to 
Government hospitals within standard ambulance response time of 10 minutes.
89% of city’s population has access to a hospital within standard ambulance response time of 10 minutes
100% of the city’s popu­ lation is within 10 minutes' walking distance from a school.
97% of the city's popu­ lation is within 10 minutes' walking distance from a government school.
Per capita organised green open space (parks, gardens, playgrounds) is at 
1.3 m2 in the city. 
CCRA-VA presents the findings in a manner that can help policymakers, implementers, and citizen platforms decide on their respective local priorities to build resilience against climate change. The entire exercise of deduction of risk provides an exhaustive baseline analysis of Bengaluru’s current socio-economic, demographic, infrastructure and service access, and sectoral situation, in a visually comprehensible and a succinct comparable format.
*
*
*
*
**
**
**
**
**
**

[Page 30]
The final output of risk assessment is presented by categorising wards under different 'Orders of Priority' in three broad categories:
1. 
Order of priority indicating exposure to hazards based on extent of impacted area and population (Fig-15)
2. Order of priority indicating sensitivity to hazards based on underlying demographic and socio-economic conditions (Fig-16)
3. Order of priority indicating (lack of) adaptive capacity based on access to services and amenities (Fig-17)
Order of Priority:
Zone 1: South
Zone 2: Yelahanka
Zone 5: RR Nagar
Zone 6: East
Zone 3: Mahadevpura
Zone 4: Dasarahalli
Zone 7: West
Zone 8: Bommanahalli
Priority 1
BBMP
Ward Boundary
Zone Boundary
Priority 2
Priority 3
Figure 15 | Summarising order of priority based on hazard exposure - Surface flooding, urban heat and air pollution
Area exposed to surface flooding
Population exposed to
Land Surface Temperature >35°C
Population exposed to surface flooding
Area exposed to air pollution
Area exposed to
Land Surface Temperature >35°C
Population exposed to air pollution
Source: WRI India analysis using Census 2011, Built footprint from WSF 2019 and amenities from BBMP 2022; details in CCRA-VA report

[Page 31]
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN
Figure 16 | Order of priority based on sensitivity parameters
* Population
Number of female literates
Households that own the property they reside at
Population Density
Number of females per 1000 males
Housing with temporary roofing material
Population under 6 years of age
Area under informal settlements (km2)
* Scheduled Caste and
Scheduled Tribe population
Order of Priority:
Zone 1: South
Zone 2: Yelahanka
Zone 5: RR Nagar
Zone 6: East
Zone 3: Mahadevpura
Zone 4: Dasarahalli
Zone 7: West
Zone 8: Bommanahalli
Priority 1
BBMP
Ward Boundary
Zone Boundary
Priority 2
Priority 3
* Number of persons
Source: WRI India analysis using Census 2011, Built footprint from WSF 2019 and amenities from BBMP 2022; details in CCRA-VA report

[Page 32]
Order of Priority:
Zone 1: South
Zone 2: Yelahanka
Zone 3: Mahadevpura
Zone 4: Dasarahalli
Zone 5: RR Nagar
Zone 6: East
Zone 7: West
Zone 8: Bommanahalli
Priority 1
BBMP
Ward Boundary
Zone Boundary
Priority 2
Priority 3
Figure 17 | Order of priority based on (lack of) adaptive capacity
Electricity as main source of lighting1 
Piped sewer and septic tanks1 (scientifically managed)
Government schools2
Metro stations2
Clean cooking fuel1
Latrines within premises1
Government health infrastructure2
Parks and open spaces2
Treated drinking water1
Fire stations2
Bus stops2
Source: WRI India analysis using Census 2011, Built footprint from WSF 2019, google maps, and amenities from BBMP 2022; details in CCRA-VA report
1Ward-wise % share of households not having access to the listed infrastructure or amenity.
2Ward-wise % share of population not having access to the listed infrastructure or amenity within the standard walkable distance or vehicular speeds.

[Page 34]
GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS 
Baseline Inventory for Bengaluru
Source: WRI India analysis for BBMP jurisdiction based on GHG-GPC framework (BASIC Level)
Source: WRI India analysis using I-Tree Canopy, 2022; Google Earth Engine
*Calculations are based on the extent of canopy cover for Trees outside Forests
Figure 18 | GHG Baseline 2019 for Bengaluru (BBMP Area)
18.7
MILLION 
METRIC
TONNES (MMT) 
OF CO2e
1.84 TONNES 
OF CO2e PER PERSON
Figure 19 | Inventory of Carbon Sequestration by Trees outside Forests in 
Carbon Sinks
Between 2001 and 2022, Bengaluru wit­ nessed annual tree canopy density loss of about 720 ha/year, while it gained/main­ tained an annual tree canopy density of 
924 ha/year of standing and newly plant­ ed trees.
The carbon sequestration potential of standing and newly planted tree canopy cover corresponds to ~0.20 million metric tonnes of CO2/year.
Total CO2 Emitted: 0.03 million metric tonnes per year 
Area with Tree Canopy Density
Lost Annually = 720 ha/year
Area with Tree Canopy Density
Gained or Maintained Annually = 
924 ha/year
Total CO2 removed: 0.20 million metric tonnes per year
The GHG inventory for Bengaluru includes an analysis of all the major sectors/sources that emit GHGs into the atmosphere (as per the 
GPC reporting framework-BASIC level). The baseline assessment also includes the major sectors/land uses that absorb or sequester GHGs from the atmosphere. This inventory will allow 
Bengaluru to build evidence-based mitigation strategies and policies, and to measure progress on the actions taken.
Critical Sources 
The total GHG emissions of Bengaluru in 
2019 were estimated at 18.73 million metric tonnes of CO2e. A major share of the emissions is from energy use in residential buildings (27%), followed by emissions from commercial buildings (26%) and on-road transport (20%). 
Electricity consumption contributes significantly to total emissions (59%), due to a considerable share of fossil fuelderived electricity in the city’s energy mix.
CHAPTER 5
21%Transportation
SECTOR-WISE 
CONTRIBUTORS
11%Waste
68%Stationary Energy
Bengaluru (2001 - 2022)

[Page 35]
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN
Business As Usual (BAU)
No-action scenario which excludes the eﬀects of ongoing/planned policies. 
Existing & Planned (E&P)
Scenario which considers the eﬀect of ongoing/planned city actions along with regional and national policies. 
Ambitious
Scenario which includes the most ambitious yet achievable strategies for the city.Major source of residual emissions are from on-road transportation, and the energy and building sectors – mostly attributed to usage of fossil fuels and electricity grid not being fully decarbonized.
Extended
Scenario which was developed since the ambitious scenario was not suﬀicient to achieve the net-zero target by 2050. This scenario projects strategy assumptions which is currently infeasible due to political, legal, economic, social or technical barriers.
2019
2030
2040
2050
29.9
39.6
49.8
22.8
27.0
29.6
15.8
13.8
8.2
12.3
7.9
1.7
18.7
Million t CO2e/year
Percentage change from base year (2019) emissions by 2050
165%
58%
56%
91%
Bengaluru has embarked on a mission to adopt a strategic roadmap to mitigate GHG emissions within the framework of the relevant policies and commitments of the Govt of India. To develop a credible pathway towards achieving this goal and to set interim targets, four future emission scenarios were developed (refer to Fig-20).
Source: WRI India analysis using the Pathways Tool developed by C40 Cities
Note: The Pathways scenarios include the thee sectors covered under the BASIC scope of the GPC, i.e., Stationary Energy, Transport and Waste. Emissions from 
Industrial Processes and Product Use (IPPU), and Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use (AFOLU) are excluded under this scope.
The city will work towards mitigating GHG emissions informed by the ambitious scenario and aligning with the policies and commitments of the Govt of 
India to arrest climate change.
FUTURE EMISSION PATHWAYS
CHAPTER 6
Figure 20 | Long-term GHG emission mitigation potential for Bengaluru under different scenarios
Some major strategies considered for achieving emission reduction targets under the ambitious and extended scenarios include:
• Energy and Buildings: Decarbonization of the electricity grid, improvement in industrial energy efficiency, transition to electric cooking and improved energy efficiency in both residential and commercial buildings.
• Transportation: Vehicular fuel shift towards cleaner fuels, greater modal share of public transport and land-use transport integration.
• Waste: Diversion of waste from landfills by better segregation at source, scientific landfills with gas capture facility, increase resource recovery and circular economy.

[Page 36]
SECTORAL PRIORITIES 
Figure 21 | Sectors identified for BCAP action orientation
The BCAP aims to integrate climate objectives in planned and future deliverables of agencies working in and for Bengaluru. The climate actions proposed in the 
BCAP have been aligned to seven major sectors (refer to 
Fig-21). It is imperative that other critical sectors, such as health, education, economy, and so on, which have direct or indirect links with those seven sectors, work in tandem.
While the mitigation of GHG emissions and reduction of risks from climate-induced hazards are the two main objectives of BCAP actions, there are several other cobenefits that impact the people, economy and nature of the city (Table-2).
The development of climate actions is a logical and iterative process informed by the evidence generated by 
BCAP (through means such as GHG inventory, pathways analysis, 
Climate 
Change 
Risk and 
Vulnerability Assessment), assessment of barriers in the city and sectoral ecosystem and development of a complete array of actions to address those barriers (refer to Fig-22).
CHAPTER 7
Source: As identified by BBMP with the technical support of WRI India
Economic - These benefits include increased income generation, creation of jobs, savings in public expenditure, reduction in economic loss, cost savings associated with clean energy adoption, and so on.
Social inclusion and equity - These benefits include the reduction of vulnerability to climate-related risks, enhancing resilience, access to basic services and amenities, and participation in decision-making by marginalised populations such as the urban poor, migrants, women, informal workers, persons with disabilities, unemployed youth, sexual minorities, the elderly, and ethnic and racial minorities. Their participation helps foster community cohesion, and ultimately to improve overall well-being.
Public health - These benefits directly and positively impact people's health, such as reduced exposure to air pollution, lower incidence of respiratory problems due to air pollution, reduction in heat-related illnesses, reduction in loss of life and injury due to climate hazards and improved overall health and well-being due to better access to quality services, amenities and resources.
Enhanced liveability - These benefits include improvement in the overall quality of life for communities and individuals in the city, through better access to opportunities and services, and better neighbourhoods that positively influence physical, mental and economic well-being.
Co-benefits of Climate Action 
Apart from the primary objective of GHG mitigation and resilience, the action tracks in each sector will have one or more of the following co-benefits.
Table 2 | Co-benefits of climate action

[Page 37]
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN
Figure 22 | Framing of actions for BCAP
INPUTS FOR ACTION FRAMING
SECTORAL ANALYSIS
ACTION FRAMING PROCESS
TYPES OF ACTIONS (INFORMED BY BARRIERS)
ACTION DETAILING
Pathways Analysis
Secondary 
Research/Literature 
Review
Knowledge & experience gained from working in the city
Consultations with stakeholder departments
Citizen consultations
Discussions with experts/ practitioners/ academia
Sectoral overview and status quo
Key sector briefing
On-going initiatives
Current initiatives proposed/under process with the departments
Key gaps
Challenges in sectoral actions that requires attention from a climatic lens
Sectoral priorities
Overall vision for the sectors for Bengaluru
Approach
Focusing on climatic lens, the approach identifies major objectives/strategies 
Key barriers
Emerging from data-based analysis, consultations and sec­ tor-wise assessment
Action tracks
Broader action areas for each sectors
Goals/targets
Measurable goals and targets for 2030, 
2040 and 2050
Infrastructure
Legal, statutory, regulatory 
Plans, Policies, Acts, 
Guidelines, Standards
Processes and institutional mechanisms
Capacity
Platforms & data systems
Finance
Inclusivity & equity
Information, education, communication
ACTIONS FOR BCAP GOVERNANCE, MONITORING, EVALUATION AND REPORTING
Targeted actions aligned with ongo­ ing initiatives
Responsible agencies
Potential source of funding
Action outputs & outcomes
Timelines and priorities
Co-benefits including inclusivity & equity
S E C T O R – W I S E A C T I O N S
Source: As identified by BBMP with the technical support of WRI India
Stakeholder Consultations

[Page 38]
Energy and Buildings
Adopt a multipronged approach to a low-carbon future by decarbonising Bengaluru's grid electricity, promoting energy efficiency, green and low-carbon buildings, and clean cooking fuels
Action Tracks
How will this action track be achieved?
Co-benefits
E&B-1
Achieve higher penetration of energy-ef­ ficient appliances and clean fuel transi­ tion in all major sub-sectors (residential, commercial, institutional, & industrial). 
40% of new appliance technology will be of high-range energy efficiency by 2030.
E&B-2 
Promote green buildings and low-carbon buildings with passive and active design strategies.
By 2030, 42% of new residential buildings and 
48% of new commercial buildings will adopt insulated walls and roofs, improved window technology, and improved building services design.
E&B-3
Increase the mix of non-fossil fuel sourc­ es in the city's grid electricity generation, 
68% by 2030 and 89% by 2050.
E&B-4 
Implement effective communication methods for nudging behavioral changes by adopting behavioral science princi­ ples through IEC programs.
E&B-5 
Develop a roadmap for affordable clean cooking fuel transition.
100% transition from solid fuel to clean cooking fuel by 2030.
BCAP agenda that this action track primarily helps in achieving 
Actions to be accomplished by the year
Direct Co-benefits
Mitigation
Adaptation & Resilience
2027
2032
2037
Economic benefits
Social inclusion
Improved public health
Enhanced livability
Goals
Number of actions to be accomplished
2042
2050
1 1
Note: For details of actions for each agency refer to section 5.3 of Bengaluru Climate Action and Resilience Plan Full Report, 2023

[Page 39]
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN
Transportation
Promote low-carbon mobility solutions, with a strong focus on Public Transport (PT), Non Motorised 
Transport (NMT) infrastructure and cleaner fuels for reducing GHG emissions, improving air quality and enhancing Bengaluru’s livability.
T-1
Reducing travel distances and minimizing travel needs by adopting suitable urban planning measures, improving transport planning processes and developing a co­ herent policy ecosystem.
92% of the new households in the city (from 
2019) should be in the Transit Oriented Develop­ ment Areas by 2050.
T-2
Improving public transport ridership through multimodal integration and de­ mand management away from private ve­ hicles.
The combined share of public transport (PT) and non-motorised transport (NMT) in total no. of trips to be 75% by 2030, 80% by 2040, 85% by 
2050.
T-3
Improving NMT access and infrastructure for a healthier and safer city.
The combined share of public transport (PT) and non-motorised transport (NMT) in total no. of trips to be 75% by 2030, 80% by 2040, 85% by 
2050.
T-4
Transitioning towards cleaner & greener vehicles; and improving vehicle efficiencies through increased access to finance, policy enablers, incentives and promoting R&D.
90% of cars and motorcycles, 75% of buses is to be powered by cleaner fuels by 2050.
T-5
Transitioning towards cleaner & greener freight through policies, incentives and fleet management.
47% of total freight vehicles is to be powered by cleaner fuels by 2050.
T-6
Ensuring a resilient urban transport system to avoid service disruptions and damage of transport infrastructure during extreme weather events which impacts people, na­ ture and economy of the city.
Action Tracks
How will this action track be achieved?
Co-benefits
Number of actions to be accomplished
Goals
BCAP agenda that this action track primarily helps in achieving 
Actions to be accomplished by the year
Direct Co-benefits
Mitigation
Adaptation & Resilience
2027
2032
2037
Economic benefits
Social inclusion
Improved public health
Enhanced livability
2042
2050
Note: For details of actions for each agency refer to section 5.3 of Bengaluru Climate Action and Resilience Plan Full Report, 2023

[Page 40]
Solid Waste
Support and enhance circular economy, improved technology solutions and scientific waste management practices to achieve net zero greenhouse gas emissions from solid waste sector
SWM-1
Divert waste from landfill by better seg­ regation of waste at source.
To achieve 100% segregation of waste by 2025 and achieve over 90% of diversion of waste from landfills by 2050 (60% by 2030 & 75% by 
2040)
SWM-2
Increase resource recovery and circular economy by promoting decentralized waste management systems.
Recycling of paper & plastic waste to be >60% by 2030, >75% by 2040 & >90% by 2050.
SWM-3
Implement scientific landfills with gas capture system and suitably repurpose the closed landfills/dump sites.
Achieve about 25% gas capture from scientific landfill by 2030, 50% by 2040 & 75% by 2050.
SWM-4
Create inclusive and hazard resilient 
SWM infrastructure and services.
Action Tracks
How will this action track be achieved?
Co-benefits
Goals
Number of actions to be accomplished
BCAP agenda that this action track primarily helps in achieving 
Actions to be accomplished by the year
Direct Co-benefits
Mitigation
Adaptation & Resilience
2027
2032
2037
Economic benefits
Social inclusion
Improved public health
Enhanced livability
2042
2050
Note: For details of actions for each agency refer to section 5.3 of Bengaluru Climate Action and Resilience Plan Full Report, 2023

[Page 41]
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN
Air Quality
Maximize air quality improvement co-benefit opportunities from BCAP by enabling a shift to clean energy, improved technology, appropriate urban planning and greening solutions, and improved monitoring systems.
AQ-1
Prevent air pollution at source through comprehensive strategies across sectors informed by evidence.
To achieve 40% reduction in PM10 concentra­ tion and 30% reduction in PM2.5 concentra­ tion by 2026 from 2017-18 levels as per revised targets prescribed by NCAP.
AQ-2
Reduce/maintain ambient air pollution levels to prescribed standards and min­ imize air pollution impacts through suit­ able local planning, urban design, and greening efforts.
AQ-3
Ensure WHO Indoor air quality stan­ dards and guidelines implementation in all public buildings by 2030 and all other buildings by 2040.
AQ-4
Developing a city-level comprehensive 
Health Action Plan for tackling health risks posed by short-term and long-term exposures to air pollution.
AQ-5
Create/improve infrastructure and capacities to develop a robust evi­ dence-based and results-oriented AQ management paradigm through mon­ itoring, evaluation, feedback loop, and knowledge creation and dissemination to encourage behavioral shifts.
30% of commercial & institutional buildings complying WHO Indoor air quality standards and guidelines by 2030.
Preparation of a roadmap for a comprehensive health action plan tacking risks due to air pol­ lution for 2025-2035.
To procure 13 new CAAQMS and transition the existing manual station to CAAQMS systems by 2035.
Action Tracks
How will this action track be achieved?
Co-benefits
Goals
Number of actions to be accomplished
BCAP agenda that this action track primarily helps in achieving 
Actions to be accomplished by the year
Direct Co-benefits
Mitigation
Adaptation & Resilience
2027
2032
2037
Economic benefits
Social inclusion
Improved public health
Enhanced livability
2042
2050
To achieve 40% reduction in PM10 concentra­ tion and 30% reduction in PM2.5 concentra­ tion by 2026 from 2017-18 levels as per revised targets prescribed by NCAP.
Note: For details of actions for each agency refer to section 5.3 of Bengaluru Climate Action and Resilience Plan Full Report, 2023

[Page 42]
Water, Wastewater and Stormwater
Enhance Bengaluru’s resilience to climate change by adopting an Integrated Urban Water Management 
Approach including freshwater, wastewater and stormwater systems.
W-WW-SW-1
Enhance access to safe and reliable water and sanitation services for all.
100% households to have access to water and sanitation infrastructure and services which is a combination of networked and decentral­ ized systems. 
W-WW-SW-2
Ensure water security by conserving water resources, recycling and safe reuse of wastewater, and diversifying the city's sources of water.
By 2050, aim to reduce non-revenue water to 
15%. Achieve reuse of treated wastewater to a minimum of 50% by 2030 and 90% by 2050.
W-WW-SW-3
Restore and enhance sponge spaces to increase groundwater recharge and de­ crease storm water runoff through green infrastructure technologies.
40% of city’s surface area to become per­ meable by 2040 by reclaiming ecologically sensitive spaces and adopting Nature Based 
Solutions.
Convert 75% of the city’s footpaths to perme­ able surface material by 2050.
W-WW-SW-4
Adopt improved technologies and nature-based solutions for efficient and equitable wastewater treatment that are aligned to the city's mitigation goals.
Achieve 95% wastewater treatment with a combination of centralised and decentralised system by 2050. Of this about 60% should adopt low carbon wastewater treatment technologies by 2050.
Action Tracks
How will this action track be achieved?
Co-benefits
Goals
Number of actions to be accomplished
BCAP agenda that this action track primarily helps in achieving 
Actions to be accomplished by the year
Direct Co-benefits
Mitigation
Adaptation & Resilience
2027
2032
2037
Economic benefits
Social inclusion
Improved public health
Enhanced livability
2042
2050
1 3
Note: For details of actions for each agency refer to section 5.3 of Bengaluru Climate Action and Resilience Plan Full Report, 2023

[Page 43]
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN
Urban Planning, Greening and Biodiversity
Improve Bengaluru’s climate resilience, livability and GHG mitigation potential by adopting climate-aware urban planning, greening and biodiversity management measures.
UPGBD-1
Promote compact development through mixed use, walkable neighborhoods.
Prepare and adopt the RMP 2041, and set up the Master Plan Coordination Committee, by 
2025.    
UPGBD-2
Develop climate-resilient and nature in­ tegrated plans for the city and city-region through participatory planning practices
All spatial plans and DCRs to adopt climate ac­ tion as a lens by 2030. 
UPGBD-3
Adopt Nature-Based Solutions (NBS) as an urban planning and design tool to im­ prove resilience and livability.
UPGBD-4
Conserve, restore and manage the city's biodiversity.
UPGBD-5
Improve access to essential services and infrastructure, including safe and afford­ able housing for all.
Conserve and restore all blue-green networks in the city. All urban infrastructure schemes and projects should adhere to disaster resil­ ience standards.
Increase the city’s tree cover (canopy) from the baseline by 10% by 2030 and 20% by 2040.
Increase the city’s green (vegetation) cover and permeable surface to 40% of the city's area by 2040, to tackle flood and heat-related disaster risk reduction.
Convert 75% of the city’s footpaths to perme­ able surface material by 2050.
Operationalise the (recently re-constituted) 
BMC by 2023 and prepare the People's Biodi­ versity Register by 2025.
By 2050, provide safe and affordable housing for 100% urban poor and vulnerable groups in locations having access to public transport stops/stations within a 5-minute walk.
By 2050, increase the city’s publicly accessi­ ble per capita open space from the existing 2.2 sqm. to 6 sqm.
Action Tracks
How will this action track be achieved?
Co-benefits
Goals
Number of actions to be accomplished
BCAP agenda that this action track primarily helps in achieving 
Actions to be accomplished by the year
Direct Co-benefits
Mitigation
Adaptation & Resilience
2027
2032
2037
Economic benefits
Social inclusion
Improved public health
Enhanced livability
2042
2050
Note: For details of actions for each agency refer to section 5.3 of Bengaluru Climate Action and Resilience Plan Full Report, 2023

[Page 44]
Disaster Management
Build an informed and proactive city supported by data-led and citizen-centric planning which is well prepared to efficiently reduce vulnerabilities and risks from extreme climate and environmental events with zero loss of life and minimal loss to its natural resources and local economy.
DM-1
Create a comprehensive spatio-temporal database pertaining to climate hazards, impacts, vulnerabilities.
A comprehensive and regularly updated data repository for the city.
DM-2
Create a robust policy framework for Di­ saster Management including a policies for addressing loss and damage from cli­ mate and environmental hazards.
A comprehensive Disaster Management Plan.
DM-3
Empower citizens, civil society and local platforms to adopt a decentralised and inclusive approach towards DRR.
Empowered ward committees for better local­ ized preparedness, response and recovery of disasters.
DM-4
Enhance ecosystem capacity to reduce disaster risk through faster and better response.
Reduction in loss of life, livelihoods, and assets due to climate and environmental hazards.
Action Tracks
How will this action track be achieved?
Co-benefits
Goals
Number of actions to be accomplished
BCAP agenda that this action track primarily helps in achieving 
Actions to be accomplished by the year
Direct Co-benefits
Mitigation
Adaptation & Resilience
2027
2032
2037
Economic benefits
Social inclusion
Improved public health
Enhanced livability
2042
2050
Note: For details of actions for each agency refer to section 5.3 of Bengaluru Climate Action and Resilience Plan Full Report, 2023

[Page 46]
BCAP GOVERNANCE
CHAPTER 8
Tenets of BCAP Governance for Inclusive Outcomes
Coherence and Coordination
• 
Constitute a high-level committee on climate action for Bengaluru 
• 
Create and operationalise a climate action cell
• 
Mandate and start climate budget reporting
• 
Include climate change as a key aspect in all departmental mandates
• 
Designate/appoint a nodal officer in each department/agency to ensure the inclusion of the climate change agenda in policies/plans/ programmes/projects
Ownership and Agency
• 
Prepare local-level plans with climate action as a component
• 
Include climate action as an agenda in Ward Committee mandates 
• 
Create climate working groups at the zone/ward level 
• 
Create a collaborative and shared platform for spatial data/analytics 
• 
Create a forum for locally led climate action in Bengaluru
Capacity
• 
Assess climate action planning and implementation capacity in stakeholder depart­ ments identified in the BCAP
• 
Design and conduct programmes on sensitisation, training, and capacity-building for climate action 
• 
Knowledge dissemination platform for the BCAP
• 
Create a pool of partner agencies
• 
Create a project preparation facility
• 
Allocate budgets for climate action gap funding for Bengaluru
Monitoring, Evaluation and Reporting
• 
An integrated digital platform for monitoring, evaluation, reporting, and learning on the BCAP will be created and operationalised, to facilitate collaboration and coordi­ nation with the utmost efficiency and transparency.
Effective implementation of the BCAP rests on the following pillars, leading to a fair and just transition to towards net zero emissions and enhanced resilience of all citizens against the impacts of climate change.

[Page 47]
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN
Climate Action Cell (CAC) 
Setting up a Bengaluru Climate Action Cell (CAC) is critical, considering the multi-sectoral and multistakeholder nature of the BCAP. The CAC will be a dedicated and well-capacitated institutional apparatus, which will anchor, aid and monitor the implementation of the BCAP. Besides the CAC, two other important facilitation centres will be created/identified for effective implementation of the BCAP: a technical support and knowledge centre and a project preparation facility.
Figure 23 | BCAP governance structure
Chief Commissioner
Special Commissioner
High-powered advisory committee
BCAP Technical Support and Knowledge Centre
Climate Action Cell (Anchored in BBMP)
BCAP Project 
Preparation Facility
• 
GHG Inventory updation
• 
Conduct periodic climate change risk and vulnera­ bility assessment 
• 
Anchor agency for capacity-building and training (including climate budget reporting)
• 
MERL activities relating to 
BCAP
• 
Coordination with stake­ holder departments
• 
Coordination with Technical 
Support and Knowledge 
Centre, and BCAP Project 
Preparation Facility
• 
Support in climate budget­ ing
• 
Other admin tasks
• 
Support departments in turning actions into fundable projects
• 
Help in raising funds
• 
Forge partnerships
Centre of Excellence/ 
Research-based Knowledge 
Institute
Stakeholder Departments (Nodal Officers)
With participation from the private sector
Source: As identified by BBMP with the technical support of WRI India

[Page 48]
Monitoring, Evaluation, Reporting, Learning (MER) structures would include indicators for measurement, reporting systems, communication protocols, and infrastructure required for effective implementation and tracking of progress on BCAP goals and targets. For the BCAP, the entirety of MER operational structures and tools will be designed based on three primary levels of MERL operations: Action, Outcome and Impact.
Figure 24 | Components of the MER Framework
MONITORING
EVALUATION
REPORTING
Action Implementation
Outcome Monitoring
Impact Monitoring
Template includes:
• 
Type of action
• 
Activity
• 
Output
• 
Timelines
• 
Implementation status (Frequency: Monthly/quarterly)
Template includes:
• 
KPIs identified
• 
Performance of baseline year
• 
Performance of evalua­ tion year
• 
Change observed (Frequency: 
6-monthly/ 
Annual/ 
2-yearly based on action type)
• 
GHG Inventory to be updated every 2 years
• 
Annual assessment of loss and damage due to climate related disasters
• 
Climate Change Risk and 
Vulnerability Assessment (CCRA-VA) to be conducted every 3-5 years
Shift observed in the performance of outcome and impact indicators (KPIs) & evaluated for course correction 
Leadership Level
Public Reporting
Periodic reporting of actions, output and impact to department heads, nodal agencies and city leadership
Reporting of the city’s performance towards net zero, adaptation, and resilience goals. 
MONITORING, EVALUATION AND REPORTING 
OF BCAP
CHAPTER 9
Source: As identified by BBMP with the technical support of WRI India
BCAP goals and targets will be evaluated every three years based on insights from monitoring exercises and revised if necessary. The entire BCAP will be revisited every five years based on updated evidence and the progress made on goals and targets.

[Page 49]
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN
BCAP MER Operational Framework
The figure below provides a schematic illustration of the BCAP MER operational framework.
Figure 25 | MER Operational Framework
ACTION LEVEL MER
OUTCOME LEVEL
IMPACT LEVEL
• 
Monitors progress of actions against planned outputs and timelines implementation
• 
Nodal officers in CAC coordinates with respective department point of contact for updating status of progress in the 
MER platform
• 
Monitors performance of identified KPIs in each sector
• 
One nodal agency in each sector identified who will be responsible for collating outcome KPIs
• 
Nodal officers in CAC coordinates with identified nodal agency in each sector for updating status of KPIs in the MER platform
• 
Monitors change in key impact indicators: ie. 
GHG emission, loss and damage, climate change risk and vulnerability
• 
Chief scientist, CAC, with support from nodal of­ ficers, coordinates with BCAP technical support and knowledge to update inventory results in the MER platform
Summary of progress of actions published
Monthly/quarterly report of progress of actions against planned timelines sent to respective 
HODs, Special 
Commissioner, 
Chief Commis­ sioner
Summary of performance of outcome KPIs published
Half yearly/yearly report of perfor­ mance of KPIs sent to respective 
HODs, Chief Com­ missioner, high- powered advisory committee
Summary of 
GHG inventory, loss and dam­ age, CCRA-VA published
Summary of progress of actions published
PUBLIC INTERFACE OF MER
STAKEHOLDER DEPARTMENTS
Source: As identified by BBMP with the technical support of WRI India

[Page 50]
WAY FORWARD
The Bengaluru Climate Action and Resilience Plan is not an end in itself, but a step towards mainstreaming climate action in the political, economic and civic discourse that shapes the city’s future. A strong political commitment to the governance and financing of the BCAP in its early years will largely determine its success in the long term. The adoption of the BCAP by diverse stakeholders will require institutional alignment, coherence, and capacity across the decision-making value chain. Preparation of the BCAP saw a three-pronged consultative exercise involving a diverse range of stakeholders, at every stage of the process. Supported by an evidence-based approach, the BCAP is not restricted to mere notional suggestions about what needs to happen in the city but adopts a more critical data/ research lens. The BCAP lays out an actionable roadmap that city agencies and ward committees can use to carve out localised interventions.
The seven sectors that have been identified to orient actions reflect the existing institutional set-up of the city, as well as the strong interdependencies certain sectors have on others. While such bucketing is useful for attributing action implementation responsibilities to one or more agencies, it is not sacrosanct and may need to be reoriented in line with future governance systems of the city as they evolve.
The identified actions have been framed carefully to make them implementable. At the same time, some actions will require further detailing to make them fundable projects. This is an important step where the suggested project preparation facility would play an important role and help align those projects to available sources of finance.
Lastly, an informed discourse on city-level climate action is extremely critical for consensus-building among diverse actors who influence decisions and perceptions but who are not essentially aligned. It forms the foundation for a continuous process of dialogue and collective consensus-building that aims to make climate action a civic agenda by involving the bottom tier of government and other non-state local actors. Enabling access to resources and information on the BCAP, and to platforms for participation, will help aid the process, bring about transparency and accountability, and instil a greater sense of ownership of climate actions among the citizens of Bengaluru.

[Page 52]
GLOSSARY
Adaptation: As per IPCC, adaptation is a process of ad­ justment to actual or expected climate and its effects. 
In human systems, adaptation seeks to moderate or avoid harm or exploit beneficial opportunities. In some natural systems, human intervention may facilitate ad­ justment to the expected climate and its effects.
Adaptative capacity: The ability of an individual or a system or the local governing body to adapt them­ selves to the needs of the region and the people during hazard occurrence and to respond in a timely efficient manner, thereby reducing loss and damage.
Carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e): The IPCC defines 
CO2e as “the amount of CO2 that would have the same global warming potential as a given amount of another 
GHG, taking into account the difference in their radia­ tive properties and atmospheric lifetimes”
Carbon sink: Any process, activity or mechanism that removes a greenhouse gas, an aerosol, or a precursor of a GHG or aerosol from the atmosphere.
Climate change: The IPCC defines climate change as a long-term change in the average state of the climate, or in its variability, that persists for decades or longer. This includes changes in temperature, precipitation, sea lev­ el, and other climate variables, resulting from natural and human causes, that have significant impacts on natural and human systems.
Climate change risk: The IPCC defines climate change risk as the potential for adverse effects, such as dam­ age or harm, resulting from climate change impacts and their interactions with vulnerabilities and exposure of human and natural systems. Climate change risk is assessed by considering the likelihood, magnitude, and timing of impacts, and can be mitigated through adap­ tation and mitigation actions.
Exposure: The presence of people in a region that could potentially host hazards. It also refers to the adaptive capacity of an individual in the occurrence of the haz­ ard.
Greenhouse Gases: The IPCC defines greenhouse gases (GHGs) as “gases that absorb and emit radiation within the thermal infrared range, leading to a warming effect on the climate system.” The main greenhouse gases of concern in the context of climate change are carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), and fluorinated gases (such as hydrofluorocarbons and sul­ phur hexafluoride). These gases are emitted through various human activities, including the burning of fossil fuels, deforestation, and agriculture.
GHG emissions inventory: An estimate of emissions from the sources and sinks within a defined spatial and temporal dimension
Global warming: Global warming is the long-term heating of Earth’s surface observed since the pre-in­ dustrial period (between 1850 and 1900) due to human activities, primarily fossil fuel burning, which increases heat-trapping greenhouse gas levels in Earth’s atmo­ sphere. 
GPC BASIC level: The GPC BASIC level is a simplified version of the Greenhouse Gas Protocol Corporate Ac­ counting and Reporting Standard (GPC), designed for small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and organ­ isations with limited capacity for greenhouse gas ac­ counting. The GPC BASIC level provides a standardised framework for calculating and reporting greenhouse gas emissions from a limited set of emission sources, such as energy use, business travel, and waste dispos­ al.
Hazard: Hazard refers to the probability of occurrence of extreme weather events either due to natural causes or due to human interventions, resulting in loss. The loss could be in terms of life, injury, infrastructure dam­ age, natural resources, or livelihood.
Mitigation: According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), Climate Change Mitigation is a human intervention to reduce the sources (of GHG emissions) or enhance the sinks of greenhouse gases

[Page 53]
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN
Net zero: Net zero means achieving a balance be­ tween the amount of GHG emissions produced and the amount removed from the atmosphere, resulting in no further increase in the concentration of these gases in the atmosphere. This balance can be achieved through a combination of reducing emissions and increasing carbon removal efforts, such as afforestation, reforesta­ tion, and carbon capture and storage technologies. 
Representative Concentration Pathways (RCP) 
Scenarios: RCP makes predictions for varied scenari­ os of how concentrations of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere will change in the future as a result of hu­ man activities. RCPs try to capture the consequences of changes in greenhouse gas concentration on the earth systems, simulate the response of climate systems, and provide a wide range of models. Scenarios include a stringent mitigation scenario (RCP2.6), two intermedi­ ate scenarios (RCP4.5 and RCP6.0), and one scenario with very high GHG emissions (RCP8.5).
Resilience: The ability of a system, its people, and its economy to anticipate, absorb and accommodate, or recover from a hazardous event in a timely and efficient manner.
Vulnerability: The tendency of a region and/or an indi­ vidual to be exposed to climate hazards and their im­ pact. It would also encompass the extent of exposure of an individual to a particular hazard based on the extent of exposure.

[Page 54]
REFERENCES
1. 
2. BDA. 2015. “BDA Revised Master Plan.” 2015. 
3. BWSSB. 2017. “BWSSB Vision Document.” https://bwssb.karnataka.gov.in/storage/pdf-files/documents/Vision%20
Document%202050%20%20new.pdf.
4. C40. 2018a. “C40 Climate Action Planning Resource Centre.” 2018. https://resourcecentre.c40.org/resources/inclusiveclimate-action.
org/s/article/Climate-Change-Risk-Assessment-Guidance?language=en_US 
6. CMP-Bengaluru. 2020. “Comprehensive Mobility Plan.” https://data.opencity.in/dataset/ddc35621-d3c2-49d7-a14e06425f3cb336/resource/58f2bd6c-2b93-4300-8a14-2929430dcc34/download/dult-comprehensive-mobility-plan-2020.
pdf.
7. 
Department, Planning. 2021. “Economic Survey 2021-22.” 2021. https://planning.karnataka.gov.in/info-4/Reports/
Economic+Survey+2021-22/en 
8. “District Bengaluru Urban, Government of Karnataka | Silicon Valley of India | India.” BUD. BUD. https://bengaluruurban.
nic.in/en/.
11. EMPRI. 2021. “Karnataka State Action Plan on Climate Change: Version 2 (Draft Report)” https://empri.karnataka.gov.in/ storage/pdf-files/CCC/KSAPCC%20.pdf 
12. ESG. 2021. “Make Bengaluru Climate Friendly: Webinar Report” September. https://esgindia.org/new/wp-content/ uploads/2021/09/BangaloreClimateActionReportEnglish.pdf 
13. Goswami, Sahana, Samrat Basak, Aakash Malik, and Raj Bhagat Palanichamy. 2022. “Urban Blue-Green Conundrum: research/urban-blue-green-conundrum-10-city-study-impacts-urbanization-natural-infrastructure-india.
14. GPC GHG. 2014. “Global Protocol for Community-Scale Greenhouse Gas Emission Inventories (GPC)” 2014. https:// ghgprotocol.org/ghg-protocol-cities or.jp/public/2006gl/vol5.html.
17. i-Tree. tool. “I-Tree Canopy.” tool. https://canopy.itreetools.org/.

[Page 55]
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN
18. KSNDMC. 2022. “Karnataka State Thunderstorm And Lightning Action Plan - 2022.” 2022. https://ksndmc.org/kn/
ViewPdf?pdfdoc=LIGHTNING-ACTION%20PLAN-2022 
19. Office of the Registrar General & Census commissioner, India. Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India. Census 2011. https://censusindia.gov.in/census.website/data/census-tables 
20. MoEFCC. 2019. “National Clean Air Programme (NCAP)” 
21. https://moef.gov.in/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/NCAP_Report.pdf 
22. MSME. 2016. “District Industrial Profile, MSME.” https://msmedibangalore.gov.in/files/Bengaluru%20Urban.pdf.
23. NIUA. 2021. “Cities Readiness Report.” https://niua.in/c-cube/c-cube-documents 
24. Ramachandra, T V, Asulabha K. S., Sincy Varghese, Vinay Shivamurthy, Dr. Bharath Aithal, Sudarshan Bhat, and Durga 
Mahapatra. 2015. “Pathetic status of wetlands in Bangalore: epitome of inefficient and uncoordinated governance”. https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.1.1092.7846 explore-topics/resource-efficiency/what-we-do/cities/cities-and-climate-change 
27. UNFCCC. 2022a. “India Updated First Nationally Determined Contribution | UNFCCC.” 2022. https://unfccc.int/ documents/611411 (The exhaustive list of references is available in the BCAP Full Report)

[Page 57]
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN
This is a short summary of the upcoming ‘Bengaluru Climate Action and Resilience Plan (BCAP), 2023'. This must not be construed as the full report. The BCAP full report will be made available online towards the end of 2023. 
In addition, a supporting publication – Climate Change Risk and Vulnerability Assessment (CCRA-VA) for Bengaluru – will also be released shortly.
 
To know more please contact:
Basavaraj Kabade - basavarajkabade@hotmail.com
Shrimoyee Bhattacharya - shrimoyee.bhattacharya@wri.org 
Note: All maps in this report are intended as visualizations to communicate city-wide data analysis for information purposes only and are not to scale.