[Page 3]
RESILIENT 
RESILIENCE STRATEGY
Directory
Mayor of Juarez
Armando Cabada Alvidrez
Chief Resilience Officer
Verónica Gonzalez Sepulveda
Prepared By:
Resilient Juarez Team
Midiala Oropesa Vento
Brenda Rodriguez Navarro
Diana Talavera Martínez
Strategy Reporter
Xóchitl Cruz Guzman
With the collaboration of:
Municipal City Hall 
Alejandro C. Loaeza Canizales
100 Resilient Cities 
Eugene Zapata-Garesche
María Ortiz
AECOM
T. Luke Young
Juliana Villabona
Cynthia Benítez
Claire Bonham-Carter
Shereen D´Souza
Cover photo
Luis Pegut
Juarez 
June 2018
Editorial direction
Andres Barragan 
Art Direction 
Mateo Zuñiga 
Sara Vergara
Layout 
Angelica Villate 
Sara Vergara 
Jeimmy Segura 
Felipe Caro 
David Vargas 
Daniel Jimenez 
Luisa Lozano
Proofreading
Virginia Kean
Printing
First Edition 
Carmona Impresores

[Page 4]
Strategy Pillars 
4.1. Strategy Structure 
4.2. How to Read Action Cards?
 
Pillar 1. Inclusive Juarez
Pillar 2. Prosperous Juarez 
Pillar 3. Integrated Juarez 
Pillar 4. Adapted Juarez
Next Steps
Collaborators and Acknowledgments 
Appendix
7.1 Indicators Table 
7.2 Abbreviations and Acronyms 
7.3 Glossary
7.4 References 
Letters
Armando Cabada Alvídrez
Mayor of Juarez 
Michael Berkowitz
Chair, 100 Resilient Cities
Verónica González Sepúlveda
Chief Resilience Officer 
Executive Summary 
100RC Initiative in Juarez 
1.1 100RC Cities that Inspired Juarez 
1.2 Understanding Urban Resilience 
1.3 Conceptual Resilience Framework 
An Overview of Juarez 
2.1 Juarez through History 
2.2 Juarez in Figures 
2.3 Resilience Challenges in Ciudad Juarez 
Developing the Strategy 
3.1 Elements of the Strategy 
3.2 Juarez Resilience Strategy Milestones 
3.3 Resilience Diagnostic 
3.4 Preliminary Resilience Assessment

[Page 5]
Letter from the Mayor of Juarez
Juarez is a city that learns from its past and builds on its strengths. Its people are the backbone of the city and have always shown the will to adapt, survive and prosper during its long, rich history, no matter what challenges they face.
The people of Juarez, which is strategically located on the northern border of Mexico, have a proven flexibility and determination, perhaps due to our desert environment. These qualities have enabled us to capitalize on new opportunities for growth. 
As Mayor, I am very proud to introduce the first Juarez 
Resilience Strategy. This document outlines our path to a balanced, more resilient future. It provides a view of Juarez as a city prepared for what lies ahead, a city that lays a foundation for inclusive prosperity; a city that addresses environmental, social and economic challenges through a strategic vision that includes all the inhabitants of this region.
This Resilience Strategy was designed in collaboration with a wide range of stakeholders from various local institutions, the public and private sectors, and civil society. It provides a dynamic roadmap that is complementary to existing strategies and action plans. It includes our efforts today, but it also articulates our city’s future challenges and offers solutions for both future city leaders and citizens. Juarez is already a resilient city, but we want to do more. And that is what this strategy is all about — always looking to the future and finding opportunities to improve our city. I want to thank everyone for your contributions to our city, the 
100RC Network for all the support provided during this project, and the Resilient Juarez Team who partnered with us on the various projects. But above all, I thank each and every citizen of Juarez who has committed to making Juarez a more resilient city.
Now is the time to maximize our efforts to secure a legacy for future generations. Together, we must set the pace for continued progress in our city.
“Juarez is already a resilient city, but it is in our nature to want to do more”
Photo credit: Luis Pegut
Armando Cabada Alvidrez
City Mayor
Introduction
Resilient Juarez
Letters

[Page 6]
“We have to assimilate the enormous weight of our past, so we will not forget what gives us life. If you forget your past, you die1 .”
Carlos Fuentes
When we discuss resilience in Juarez, we recall the catastrophic events that have marked the city, its inhabitants, and the deep wounds that have not yet healed. While these wounds are still open, we can become a unified society and creating the conditions in which we can coexist and live in harmony.
Juarez, one of the most extensive semi-desert zones in Mexico (with an extreme climate), and positioned geographically on the border, has faced many challenges over the years, reinventing itself on a daily basis. Urban resilience, as a concept, has been and will continue to be an overarching, inclusive and resourceful approach to addressing our challenges.
This document, Juarez Resilience Strategy, is the result of the combined efforts of stakeholders from various sectors of society, both from Juarez and El 
Paso, our sister city on the US side of the border. The strategy includes a series of actions, collaboratively developed, to strengthen the city and foster its longevity. These actions demonstrate the aspirations of the citizens of Juarez. The four pillars of the Resilience Strategy – Inclusivity, Integration, Adaptability and Prosperity – will serve as a model for other cities in the region, securing Juarez’s place as a pioneer of the resilience movement.
Every word, every line, every action is devoted to improving the lives and the well-being of Juarez citizens. It has been written for every girl, boy, young person, woman, man, senior citizen – every human being living in this beloved place that is Juarez .
Letter from 
Veronica Gonzalez
On behalf of 100 Resilient Cities staff I want to congratulate Mayor Armando Cabada Alvidrez, the Chief Resilience 
Officer Veronica Gonzalez and Juarez for the launching of 
Resilient Juarez. This is an important milestone for the city and our collaboration with it.
As the largest city on the border with the United States, 
Juarez has played a fundamental role in Mexico’s growth and development. The county’s first customs office was established in Juarez, and it is now home to the Museum of the Revolution. The city is also known for its diversity, its large population of young people, and a growing entrepreneurial spirit. For all these reasons, the city is positioned to set the direction of Mexico’s future. Despite its reputation for drug-related violence and tragic femicides, Juarez is today a safer, more vibrant city that is full of civic pride. 
City leaders have made great strides in bringing abandoned public places, including the city’s Historic District, back to life and creating safe spaces for women. 
Although the city has moved forward, it still faces challenges that could impact and inhibit its resilience. The desert impacts, the extreme weather variations as well as floods, droughts and heat waves are frequent and destructive shocks. At the same time, chronic stresses such as unemployment, crime, and poverty continue to erode the urban fabric and makes Juarez even more vulnerable when shocks occur. Other conditions that pose a threat to the city’s resilience if left unaddressed include the city’s rapid growth and the resulting urban sprawl, and its excessive dependency on the export industry (maquiladoras).
This Resilience Strategy provides not just a perspective on these shocks and stresses, but concrete actions to address them, including some initiatives specifically devoted to the safety of 
One of these initiatives will reuse 20% of the land in the city that is regarded as unsafe and violence-prone wasteland. 
Owners of these plots of land would receive incentives to turn them into temporary public spaces. If the land is in an area without green spaces, the owner would be offered a 
Letter from 
Michael Berkowitz special incentive to turn the land into a green space. 
This type of initiative addresses environmental concerns as well safety and social cohesion goals. Other initiatives would bring community leaders into the planning process, thus guaranteeing that their needs and voices are reflected in any actions that might affect them. And importantly, this strategy includes actions that will empower citizens and transform the city’s image in order to attract tourism and investment.
Through the commitment and hard work of Chief Resilience Officer Gonzalez and her team, as well as the support of 
Mayor Alvidrez, this Resilience Strategy reflects the city’s diverse voices and all the communities that were involved in its development. While the launching of this Strategy is a very important achievement, the work of resilience-building is far from completed. It will no doubt require persistence and unwavering commitment to make the vision described in these pages a reality. We look forward to continued collaboration with the city.
Michael Berkowitz
Chair, 100 Resilient Cities
Verónica González Sepúlveda 
Directora de Resilencia
Introduction
Letters
Resilient Juarez
Resilient Juarez
1. Paris Review, Winter issue, 1981.

[Page 7]
Executive Summary
Throughout its history, Juarez has evolved its capacity through economic and social strategies. 
Yet, urban planning critical to the future development of the city has been relegated. Today, the maquiladora industry, while being one of the city’s strengths and major assets, causes excessive dependency on global markets. Juarez must transition to another economic model in the near future and, at the same time, address the critical issues of urban development. 
The city limits of Juarez have expanded over the years due to unplanned urban sprawl. Thus, The city must improve its approach to planning, take into account the needs of its citizens, and enable their involvement at the municipal and state levels. Juarez is a city that has been shaped by people from many different places and in times of crisis, that diversity creates conflict. 
The population includes a significant number of young people. If the energy and talents of these young people were to be appropriately harnessed, the city can become a thriving metropolis by 2030. 
The geographic location and climate of Juarez is both a weakness and an opportunity. The city’s desert surroundings and extreme temperatures create health issues among both permanent and temporary citizens, affecting the quality of its services, and their safety. Given these factors, environmental resilience is critical.
In December 2014, Juarez was selected to be part of 100 Resilient Cities, an initiative pioneered and funded by The Rockefeller Foundation. 
In 2015 the process of diagnosing the city´s resilience began. About 600 people participated in identifying the city’s key challenges and potential ways in which they could be addressed. 
A wide range of strategic actors collaborated on the development of the Juarez Resilience Strategy, offering their ideas and experience in meetings and workshops.
The Resilience Strategy consists of 4 pillars, 11 goals, and 33 actions. The pillars (Inclusive Juarez, Prosperous Juarez, Integrated Juarez, and 
Adapted Juarez) are the backbone of the strategy and serve as a guide to achieving a resilient city. The 11 long-term goals will be accomplished through 33 concrete actions—specific projects and tactical activities implemented to meet the Strategy’s objectives. To strengthen the collaboration among the various actors, three cross-cutting axes (best practices in community development) are included: human rights, citizen involvement, and good governance.
This pillar is about improving urban life and the urban environment in a way that aligns with what people want and need. Under this pillar, the city encourages substantial citizen involvement, as it is through this type of engagement that positive change will occur. Actions related to the use of public space are a good starting point for citizen involvement because the city and its citizens have a clear stake in city spaces that are more inclusive, green and safe. 
This pillar is designed to respond to the need to diversify the current economic model through innovation, competitiveness and a focus on sustainability. This requires the growth of high-quality, well-paid green jobs; the creation of programs that foster scientific development; and the forging of new relationships among the academic and industrial sectors and the community. Prosperous Juarez seeks to lead these efforts and increase investments that will ensure the economic growth and well-being of Juarez families.
This pillar focuses on creating a resilient, innovative, long-term urban planning approach that guarantees full access to the city to all its inhabitants. It seeks to implement strategies that bring together the previously segregated sections of the city. Most of the jobs in Juarez are clustered in its existing industrial parks and along the city’s northern border, while workers’ homes are on the periphery of the city. Therefore, this pillar focuses on transportation-oriented development and prioritizes alternative and sustainable mobility as well as the creation of safe corridors for pedestrians and cyclists.
This pillar aims to make the most of the advantages and opportunities presented by the city’s desert environment and ensure the sustainable use of its resources by creating management models for non-renewable resources. This pillar focuses on the need to create awareness about the risks posed by climate change, such as water supply shortages, heat waves and floods, and uses the concept of resilience as a lens for adaptation and transformation.
Inclusive 
Juarez
Integrated 
Juarez
Adapted 
Juarez
Prosperous 
Juarez
Safe and Empowered Community
Strong, Diverse and Competitive Economy
A City that is a Model of Resilient Planning
A Society that Protects the Environment and Is Prepared to 
Face Disasters
Executive Summary
Resilient Juarez
Resilient Juarez

[Page 8]
To Recover Urban Public and Vacant Spaces to Foster Social Exchange
GOALS
ACTIONS
To Improve Safety Conditions for Women
Juarez as a Model of Innovation and Competitiveness
Circular Economy to Foster New 
Business Models
Juarez Image and Appeal for 
Tourists
The Right to the City
Resilient Planning
Alternate Connectivity and Mobility Plan
Juarez as a Model of Climate 
Adaptation
Environmental Education and Culture for Citizens and Private Sector
Comprehensive Water 
Management 
4.3.1 Innovative Project Portfolios to Assist in Floods 
4.3.2 Green infrastructure in Public Spaces
1.2.1 Technology Apps for Citizen Safety and Security
1.2.2 CCommunity Leadership Program
1.2.3 “Safe Corridor for Women”
1.2.4 International Safety and Social Inclusion Network (ISSIN)
2.1.1 Economic Competitiveness Indicators System
2.1.2 Develop Innovation and Technology Workshops for Children and Young People
2.1.3 Women Economic and Social Empowerment Workshops in Ciudad Juarez
2.2.1 Municipal Sustainability and Circular Economy Program 
2.2.2 Strategy “+A-D: más alimento, menos desperdicio” (More food, less waste)
2.3.1 Transform the Public Image of Juarez
2.3.2 Promote Tourism and Culture in Juarez
2.3.3 Promote Ecotourism in Desert Settings
3.1.1 Prepare and Publish the Juarez Charter for the Right to the City
3.1.2 Revitalize the Historic District as a Place of Social Exchange, Recreation and Identity
3.1.3 Historic District Regulation
3.2.1 Institutionalize the Juarez Resilience Office
3.2.2 Resilience Culture and Communications Strategy
3.2.3 Binational Agenda on Urban Resilience at the Northern Border
3.3.1 Transportation-Oriented Development Plan
3.3.2 Bicycle Lanes and Pedestrian Corridors Project
3.3.3 Interactive Map of Alternate Travel Routes
3.3.4 Road Safety Handbook
4.1.1 Ciudad Juarez Environmental Agenda
4.1.2 Municipal Climate Adaptation Strategy
4.2.1 Municipal Strategy for Environmental Education
4.2.2 “Urban Orchards” Project
Support Fund for 
Innovative and 
Creative Talents (FATIC)
To drive and foster the “Annual Program 10 days, 10 actions”
1.1.1 Promote and Drive the Creation of Resilient Parks
1.1.2 Organize the Annual Contest Let’s Enhance a Public Space Adoption of Public Spaces 
Program Design and Implementation
1.1.3 Adoption of Public Spaces Program Design and Implementation 
1.1.4 Art Programs and Cultural Workshops for Children and Young People in Public Spaces
1.1.5 Vacant Plots Recovery Program
Inclusive 
Juarez
Integrated 
Juarez
Adapted Juarez
Prosperous 
Juarez
Executive Summary
Resilient Juarez
Resilient Juarez

[Page 9]
100 RC 
Initiative in 
Juarez 
Photo credit: Luis Pegut Urban resilience is the capacity of individuals, communities, institutions, businesses and systems within a city to survive, adapt and grow, no matter what kind of acute shocks and chronic stresses they experience.
RESILIENT JUAREZ

[Page 10]
During this phase, new analysis is conducted and the city’s primary challenges are explored in more depth. Gaps and interdependencies are also identified. This phase ends with the launching of the Resilience 
Strategy for the city.
This phase focuses on development and implementation of the initiatives identified in the Resilience Strategy.
Deeper 
Knowledge of 
City´s Priorities 
Strategy 
Implementation
Pioneered and funded by Rockefeller Foundation. 
The 100 Resilient Cities (100RC) initiative is a program that supports the adoption and incorporation of a resilience vision which includes assessing the shocks (i.e., earthquakes, fires, floods) and the stresses that weaken the fabric of a city on a dayto-day or cyclical basis, so that the participant cities become more resilient and better prepared to face the physical, social and economic challenges of the 21st century.
The project promotes the hiring of a Chief Resilience Officer (CRO) charged with fostering and coordinating the resilience initiatives of the city, offers a network of experts who can help develop a city’s resilience strategy, and provides access to services offered by strategic partners at a global level. As a member of the 100RC Network, the city gains access to other 100RC cities in order to exchange experiences and share best practices. 100RC aims to help individual cities become more resilient and build collaboration among governments, civil society, the private sector, and individual citizens. The program consists of three phases.
Phase 1
In this phase, a resilience baseline is established with the participation and involvement of various key stakeholders. This phase concludes with the preparation of the Preliminary Resilience Assessment (PRA)
Identification of the Top Challenges 
Faced by the City 
In December 2014, 
Juarez was chosen to be part of the 100 Resilient 
Cities Initiative. 
01 100RC initiative at Juarez
Resilient Juarez
Resilient Juarez

[Page 11]
First Round
Third Round Cities
4 Cities that 
Inspired the 
Strategy
Second Round
Cities
Third Round
Cities 
1.1 100RC Cities that 
Inspired Juarez
Addis Ababa 
Atlanta 
Belfast 
Buenos Aires 
Calgary
Can Tho
Cape Town 
Colima
Guadalajara, 
Metropolitan Region
Haiyan 
Honolulu 
Jaipur 
Jakarta 
Kyoto 
Lagos 
Louisville 
Luxor 
Great 
Manchester
Melaka
Miami, 
Metropolitan 
Region 
Minneapolis 
Montevideo 
Nairobi 
Nashville 
Panama 
Paynesville 
Pune
El Salvador 
Seattle 
Seoul 
Tbilisi
Tel Aviv 
La Haya Toronto
Washington DC 
Yiwu
1. Quito
2.Thessaloniki
3. Amman
4. Melbourne
First Round Cities
Second Round Cities
Bangkok
Berkeley
Boulder
Bristol
Byblos
Christchurch
Da Nang
Dakar
Durban
El Paso
Glasgow
Los Angeles
Mandalay
Medellin
Melbourne
Mexico City
New
Orleans
New York 
City
Norfolk
Oakland
Puerto Alegre
Quito
Ramallah
Rio de Janeiro
Roma
Rotterdam
San Francisco
Semarang
Surat
Vejle
Accra
Amman
Athens
Barcelona
Belgrade
Bangalore
Boston
Cali
Chennai
Chicago
Dallas
Deyang
Zhuangzi
Juarez
Kigali
Lisbon
London
Milan
Montreal
Paris
Pittsburgh
San Juan
Santa Fe
Santiago de los Caballeros
Santiago 
Metropolitan 
Region
Singapore
Saint Louis
Sydney
Thessaloniki
Toyama
Tulsa
Wellington
3. 
Amman, 
Jordania
4. 
Melbourne, Australia
1. 
Quito, Ecuador
2. 
Tesalónica, Grecia
Juarez
01 100RC initiative at Juarez
Resilient Juarez
Resilient Juarez

[Page 12]
Photo credit: Luis Pegut
01 100RC initiative at Juarez
The CRF is the result of extensive research on resilient systems. It identifies seven resilience qualities all resilient cities have:
These are well-conceived, well-constructed and wellmanaged systems.
Prioritize broad consultation to create a sense of shared ownership in decision- making.
Bring together systems and institutions that work together to achieve greater ends.
 Recognize alternate ways to use resources in times of crisis to meet their needs or achieve their goals.
Create spare capacity to accommodate disruptions due to extreme stresses, surges in demand or an external event.
Systems that enable a city to adopt alternative strategies in response to changing circumstances or a crisis, external threats, lack of data or the inclusion of new stakeholders.
They use past experiences to inform future decisions.. 
Conceptual Resilience Framework
Reflective
Robust
Integrated
Redundant
Inclusive
Resourceful
Flexible
In 1970 ecologists coined the term resilience to describe the capacity of a system to maintain or recover its functionality in the event of an interruption or disruption. Resilience is applicable to cities, as they are complex systems that are 
1.2 
Understanding 
UrbanResilience constantly adapting to changing circumstances. 
To build this recovery capacity, cities must be designed and function in such a way that they can resist, respond and adapt quickly to shocks and stresses.
The concept of a resilient city becomes relevant when acute shocks and chronic stresses threaten the city’s systems. 
Resilient Juarez
Resilient Juarez

[Page 13]
01 100RC initiative at Juarez
The dimensions of CRF
In fr as tr uc tu re a n d 
En vi ro n m en t
Ec o no m y an d 
So ci et y
Le ad er sh ip a nd S tr at eg y a
2a a a b b b b c c
3c c
H ea lt h an d 
W el lb ei ng
1 a. Meets 
Basic Needs
1 b. Supports Livelihoods and Employment
1 c. Ensures Public 
Health Services
2 a. Fosters Economic Prosperity
2 b. Ensures Social Stability, 
Security and Justice
2 c. Promotes Cohesive and 
Engaged Communities
3a. Provides Reliable 
Communication and Mobility
3b. Ensures Continuity of 
Critical Services
3c. Provides and Enhances 
Natural and Man-Made Assets
1.3 
Conceptual 
Resilience 
Framework
The Conceptual Resilience Framework (CRF) was developed in collaboration with Arup2 to create a global standard for assessing the resilience of a city and to establish universal indicators for an analysis of urban resilience that is uniform across the various cities that are part of the 100RC initiative. The CRF serves as a guide for the collection of data, perceptions, and ideas from various sectors and stakeholders, including the scientific community, the private sector, civil society and government.
The CRF, which consists of 4 dimensions, 12 main indicators and 50 sub-indicators, is a guide and a set of recommendations that facilitate 
Tailoring is a basic function that depends on risk assessment as well as the integration and potential expansion of the good resilience practices that already exist in a city. In addition, it must involve institutions and stakeholders actively committed to the resilience-building effort.
the strategy development process. Cities have diverse challenges and contexts, and so each must tailor the resilience strategy development process to its specific needs and capacities. 
2. Arup is a British company that specializes in design, engineering and consulting.
4 a. Promotes Leadership and Effective Management 
4 b. Empowers a Broad 
Range of Stakeholders- 
4 c. Fosters Long-Term and 
Integrated Planning
Resilient Juarez
Resilient Juarez

[Page 14]
An 
Overview of Juarez
Photo credit: Luis Pegut
RESILIENT JUAREZ
Juarez is located in the northern part of Mexico, in Chihuahua State, by the shore of the Rio 
Grande along the border of the United States. It is Chihuahua’s largest city and Mexico’s eighth largest metropolitan area (INEGI, 2015).

[Page 15]
Bridge across the Rio Grande by Fred 
Murer, from the special collections of Juarez 
Autonomous University.
The City’s
Origins
The city of Juarez dates back to the 17th century, with the establishment of the Mission of 
Our Lady of Guadalupe in 1659, the bringing of peace, and conversion of the Jumano, Suma and Manso Indians who had lived there since ancient times. During the Spanish conquest of the northern territories of Mexico, the city became a strategic stopping place for travelers in the inhospitable country. At the beginning of the 18th century, a “presidio” (military town) was established to protect the interests of the 
Spanish crown.
2.1 Juarez through 
History
The economy of Juarez is based on manufacturing. The city is strategically located near the border bridges and has quick access to many areas. 
Most of the raw materials come from U.S. companies that use their Mexican subsidiaries for manufacturing because of Mexico’s lower labor costs.
Source: Cartography Room, Manuel Orozco y Berra No. 2418
The city’s early irrigation system consisted of two main canals (Acequia Madre and Acequia del Pueblo) and their numerous secondary canals. Despite the area’s desert surroundings, an abundance of water and fertile soil enabled intensive farming. To the eyes of a traveler at the end of the 18th century, 
Paso del Norte was like the “Murcia Orchard itself” and from that time forward was famous for its vines, fruits and, above all, the cotton, which is so characteristic of northern Mexico.
02 An Overview of the City
Resilient Juarez

[Page 16]
Old Mission Church (more than 350 years old), Juarez, 
Mexico. Drawing by John 
Lawer, courtesy of the special collections of Juarez 
Autonomous University. 
Modern City
In the first decades of the 20th century, many border cities got their supplies from their sister cities in the U.S., as they were able to find a diversity of products at good prices. In Juarez a nascent industrial zone, which was linked to cotton and other agricultural products for the local market, extended southwest along the railroad tracks. By 1950, there were 6,765 jobs in the commercial area along the tracks, on the street leading to the international bridge, around the old mission, and in the main streets of the city. Another thriving industry at the time was the entertainment industry, specifically cantinas (bars). The idea of driving the city’s economic development by strengthening industry, commerce and agriculture was beginning to take hold by 1960 among those with economic and political influence.
Maquiladoras Regime (1972): Its goal was to develop the border zone and contribute to reducing regional inequalities. 
Since then, the growth of maquilas has accelerated, and they have dominated border life.
Border Industrialization Program: This was created when the Bracero (migrant laborer) Program was suspended. The end of that program left 200,000 Mexicans who had worked in U.S. fields without jobs. Many decided to stay in northern Mexico rather than go back where they came from without a job.
Industrial 
City 
Starting in 1960, programs to foster the city’s development were begun: 
National Border Program (1961): Its goal was to foster economic and social development along the border, making it appealing to tourists. 
To this end, the Federal Government invested in the construction of cultural centers, museums, and spaces for the sale of Mexican crafts.
02 An Overview of the City
Resilient Juarez

[Page 17]
Growth of 
Urban Sprawl
From 1983 to 1990, the growth in the labor force was so strong that it consolidated the position of the maquiladora industry, which has shaped the city. Migrants to the city have usually settled in the west and southwest areas of the city, which are the most vulnerable sections of the city. The entry of massive numbers of women into the labor market was another effect of the growth of the maquiladora industry. This has disrupted traditional family roles and resulted in a high rate of domestic and sexual violence against women as well as a high rate of femicides. (Padilla, 2012: 699). 
1850 - 1950
1950 - 1990
1990 - 2000
2000 - 2006
1950
1990
2000
2006-2017
Source: Urban Growth Map
Municipal Institute of Research andPlanning (2017)
02 An Overview of the City
Resilient Juarez

[Page 18]
2.2 Juarez in Figures in operation industrial plants (2013)
Level of wellbeing 2010 (PDUS, 2016)
Population with income below the poverty line (CONEVAL, 2015)
39.9%
Urban solid waste
1,200 -1,300 tons / day
66.5% 
2.70% 
Industrial 
Sector
30.70% 
Trade and services
Agricultural and mining
Employment
6.4%
Unemployment rate
Unemployment
9.7 
3.95
Industrial 
Parks
Rate of 
Schooling
Inflation rate (PEJ, 2017) 
Industrial areas
11933,7 Acres
35.99%
25.29%
24.09%
16.64%
Medium
Low 
High
Very High
30140515.81 Acres 
Territory
85.3% 
Population with 
Health coverage (PDUS, 2016)
Economy (2015) (PDUS, 2016)
Latitude North: 31° 44’ 
Longitude West: 106° 29’ 
Altitude: 1.140 masl
1,391,180 (2017)
Population
Life in the city
99.4% 
Water consumption l /resident/day (JMAS, 2013)
5.66 m2/hab
Green space (9-16m /inhab. WHO recommendation)
Border crossings 20163
Desert-arid - extreme weather
Traveling in 2014 (PMC)
51%
Automobile
Pedestrian
Mass transportation
Bicycle
27%
21%
1%
3. Information obtained from the following page http://es.pdnuno.com/ about, managed by the international bridges Board of Directors. 
10,559 million (2016)
Vehicles
5,848 million (2016)
Pedestrians
Rainfall Annual average
Millimeters (2005-2010)
44oC
Maximum temp.
-22.2 oC
Minimum temp.
Climate and natural environment
Mobility 
111.2 oF 
71.96 oF
02 An Overview of the City
Resilient Juarez

[Page 19]
2.3 Resilience 
Challenges in 
Ciudad Juarez
40oC (104o F)
Juarez is located in a semi-desert zone, with extreme weather and summer temperatures that exceed 40 ºC (104 ºF), with low humidity, while in winter the temperature drops below 0 ºC (32 ºF). Historically, 
Extreme Weather 
In the summer the minimum registered temperature was 
-22 °C o -7,6 °F). During spring and fall, temperatures are mild. Winds with speeds above 40 km/h (24 mi/hr) are always present and nights can be very chilly (IMIP, 2010).
5. Definition used by 100RC.
4. The information source for the resilience challenges was the 
Sustainable Urban Development Plan for Ciudad Juarez 2016.
Urban Resilience is the capacity of individuals, communities, institutions, businesses and systems within a city to survive, adapt and grow, no matter what kind of chronic stresses and acute shocks they experience.5
0oC (32o F)
En el invierno
40 km/h (24 mi/hr)
Winds with speeds exceeding
64,305
2012-To date
One of the social issues that has impacted the city is unemployment, which worsened in two specific periods. Between 2001 and 2003, 
66,602 formal jobs were lost, and between 2008 and 2009, 70,073 formal jobs were lost due to the world ecoUnemployment nomic recession. From 2012 to the present, the city has just barely recovered 64,305 formal jobs. Beyond increasing the number of jobs in industry, the most important challenge is to improve wages, as most are below the poverty line.
Formal jobs have been gained
66,602
2001-2003
Formal jobs were lost
70,073
2008-2009
Formal jobs were lost
Resilient Juarez
02 An Overview of the City

[Page 20]
1,552
2009
2012
2010
39.86% earned between 0 and 
2 minimum wages
1.3 million inhabitants
2013
2011 in 2011, 1,552 were reported. In the last few years, due to various strategies and the joint efforts of the three levels of government and civil society, there has been a significant reduction in violence, especially in the number of reported homicides. 
In 2012, there were 751 homicides, while in 
2013 there were only 485.
2,932
Homicides
2010 reduction of violence down to 
Public Security
Poverty 
Ciudad Juarez suffered the most severe social crisis in its history during the 2006 – 2012 administration, mainly due to the 
Federal Government’s effort to combat drug trafficking During this period, crimes such as kidnapping, extortion and homicide increased. In 2009 there were 2,449 homicides. In 2010 there were 2,932 and 
In 2017, the city had almost 1.4 million inhabitants, of which 37.8% were living in poverty. 
Of the employed and economically active population (PeA), 39.86% earned between zero and two minimum wages, while 32.79% had to earn between two and four minimum wages. Based on these figures, finding a decent home and affordable transportation is just out of the question for many Juarez residents. According to a study conducted by 
37.8%
32.79% lived in poverty earned between 2 and 
4 minimum-wages
2.5
2004-2009
Femicides
Starting in 1993, Ciudad Juarez became known worldwide for the disappearances of women and its high rate of femicides. There was a significant increase in 2009 (164), 2010 (304) and 2011 (195), years that coincide with the war against drug trafficking.By the in the rest of the country
1993-2005
Disappearances and deaths “Las Muertas de Juarez”
Source: Conavim year 2009, the femicide rate was 
19.1% for every 100,000 women, compared with the rest of the country, where the rate was 2.5% for every 100,000 between 2004 and 2009 (Small Arms Survey research, 2012). This tragic history, known as Las muertas de Juarez (The dead women of Juarez), left a mark on the city and brought civil society together to reduce the femicide rate. It also led to the creation of the Ciudad 
Juarez Forensic Sciences Laboratory to help solve these and other crimes.
19.1%
2009 in Ciudad Juarez
TOTAL
Colegio de la Frontera Norte in 2016, 
85 zones have been identified as priority areas for investment and reducing the conditions of poverty. The zones are located in the western and southwestern sections of the city, where the greatest economic, infrastructure and transportation deficiencies exist, as well as where the population has a limited level of education.
Resilient Juarez
02 An Overview of the City
1993-2017

[Page 21]
Photo credit: Luis Pegut
Developing the Strategy
Juarez Resilience Strategy has the goal of keeping essential city functions operating during a crisis and of creating a resilient model with actions that will ensure the city’s capacity to respond to environmental, social and economic challenges.
RESILIENT JUAREZ

[Page 22]
03 Developing the Strategy
The Strategy sets priorities and develops resilience measures to improve the lives of Juarez inhabitants by building a more equitable society and focusing on the groups that are most vulnerable to the risks and challenges of the 21st century.
3.1 Elements of the Strategy
The Resilience Strategy encourages a long-term, cross-cutting view that will help the government, private sector, civil society as well as ordinary citizens to understand and address acute shocks and chronic stresses in a structured way at all levels (federal, state and municipal). The resiThe essential components of the Juarez 
Resilience 
Strategy 
2.
3.
1.
The building of resilience is an inclusive process based on the participation of stakeholders from various levels of government (municipality, city, state, federation) and from the academic community, civil society, and companies or representatives of the private sector, as well as on multilateral and bilateral cooperation with development organizations. 
The Strategy builds the city’s adaptive capacities to face environmental challenges, such as climate change, and chronic stresses that are risks to the future sustainability of the city, such as environmental degradation, lack of mobility, and deteriorating, ,and air quality.
lience challenge must be addressed in a holistic way that integrates the views of all stakeholders and takes into account all of the challenges facing Ciudad Juarez. In September 2015, the three phases for implementing the Juarez Resilience 
Strategy began. 
Various territorial (city/municipality/region) risks to which the city is exposed.
The quality, integrity and reliability of information about the city’s resilience needs and opportunities..
The level of understanding of resilience challenges and opportunities.
 
The existing decision-making processes as well as existing strategies, programs and actions that build resilience.
To develop activities and identify priorities, the following elements were evaluated:
The commitment and acceptance by key stakeholders.
 
The capacity and openness of government and civil society regarding the innovation, new ideas and paradigm changes needed to build up an adaptive capacity to face chronic stresses and respond to acute shocks.
The methodology proposed by 100RC, which will be described in more detail.
Photo credit:: Arath Rojas
Resilient Juarez

[Page 23]
03 Developing the Strategy
3.2 Juarez 
Resilience Strategy 
Milestones
Selection of Ciudad 
Juarez as a Resilient City
Appointment of a Chief Resilience Officer
Citizen Perception 
Workshops
2015 
September
2014 
November
2016 
June
Preliminary 
Resilience 
Assessment
Public Consultation 
Workshops
Diagnosis, Development and Implementation
Implementation of the Juarez 
Resilience Strategy
Creation of the 
Resilience Directors 
Committee
2017 
January
2018 January
2017 February
2017 December
2018 November
2018 March
2016 
September
Resilient Juarez

[Page 24]
3.3 Resilience 
Diagnostic
Diagnosing the city’s resilience involved a review of government and academic publications; identification of stakeholders;, semi-structured interviews and surveys; perception workshops and workshops on physical assets, stresses and shocks; and an inventory of the resilience-building actions and programs already in place(Phase I).
In 2016, risk assessment exercises were conducted with city staff and interested stakeholders through workshops, community walks, and reviews of existing plans and data. In addition, 273 surveys and 10 interviews were conducted with stakeholders from civil society, academia, government, and the private sector. The outcomes were assessed with the toolkit developed by 100RC and 
AECOM6 to determine the city’s infrastructure assets and the interrelationship between acute shocks and chronic stresses and the city’s level of vulnerability. With this process some of the most relevant assets for building resilience in the city were identified.
6. The analysis of inputs was conducted using a toolkit developed by AECOM, an international consulting firm that is a strategic partner of 100RC.
A
B
C
Assets
Stresses
Shocks
Photo credit: Iván Bautista
03 Developing the Strategy
Resilient Juarez

[Page 25]
03 Developing the Strategy
Assets are defined as tangible goods owned by the city-that are part of the system that enables the city to function. These assets are critical to maintaining the population’s quality of life. They may be economic natural, urban, social or technological infrastructure.
AssetsA
Photo credit: Ivan Bautista
Public parks and recreational areas are prominent assets. On the other hand, management of assets has a low level of service or maintenance, as it is the case of mobile network or telephone networks, allocation of natural gas, sewage systems, irrigation canals, river ways and water storage, among the main ones.
The toolkit was also used to analyze the following to determine stresses and shocks.
Public Parks and 
Recreational Areas
Main Highways
Sewage Irrigation Canals (Public and Private) 
Care Facilities for 
Senior Citizens 
Water Supply 
Storage
Homeless 
Shelters
Day Care Centers
Parking Lots in 
Public Squares
Risks and threats to the city.
Potential shocks and impacts of serious breakdowns in the city’s basic infrastructure.
Current trends and future scenarios related to external social, technological, environmental, economic and political forces.
The most likely scenarios posing the greatest risk to the city and their relationship to the city’s chronic stresses.
Existing relationships between acute shocks and chronic stresses and their effects on the city.
River Ways 
Resilient Juarez

[Page 26]
03 Developing the Strategy
Chronic Stresses are ongoing factors that weaken the fabric of a city.
StressesB 
Photo credit: Norberto Diaz
Lack of accessibility and poor quality of basic utilities (water and electric power)
Lack of accessibility and poor quality of public services (health and education)
Chronic health conditions in the population (e.g., asthma, high blood pressure, diabetes)
Environmental pollution
Economic crisis
Discrimination (e.g., gender, race, sexual orientation)
Lack of safe and affordable housing
Inefficient public transportation ocial and economic inequality
Domestic and/or community violence
Unemployment
Resilient Juarez

[Page 27]
Photo Credit: Ivan Bautista
Acute shocks are sudden, catastrophic events that threaten a city. 
With stakeholders from various areas and sectors, we identified acute shocks that impacted the city’s resilience, its institutions, and the support systems necessary to keep it functioning.
Shocksc
The results of the analysis show that two of the main stresses on the city—lack of access to basic utilities and lack of infrastructure— would greatly impact the city’s capacity to recover quickly in the event of an acute shock. 
Stresses such as deteriorating critical infrastructure or downturns in the local economy would also increase in the event of an acute shock.
Droughts, heat waves
Extended rainfall with surface flooding
Extreme weather Snow storms
Disease outbreaks
Natural events resulting from climate change
03 Developing the Strategy
Resilient Juarez

[Page 28]
Photo credit: Luis Pegut
03 Developing the Strategy
3.4 
Preliminary 
Resilience 
Assessment
The Preliminary Resilience Assessment (PRA),7 which was developed based on the diagnosis, reflects the complex interrelationship between acute shocks and chronic stresses affecting the city. Based on the results, actions to address these challenges must be developed strategically. Five discovery areas were identified, initial actions were determined, and implementation of these actions will be coordinated across the various sectors.
7. Preliminary Resilience Assessment, 
Resilient Juarez

[Page 29]
03 Developing the Strategy
Five discovery areas were identified by asking a key diagnostic question that resulted in the following vision statements:
Discovery Areas
The identification of alternate, sustainable and inclusive mobility systems to drive urban development with a resilience lens.
Transformation of the city’s economic system, with an emphasis on developing affordable housing and investing in education, innovation and local entrepreneurship.
Mobility
Economic 
Diversification
I
II
Implementation of water management strategies linked to a framework of best management practices and public participation.
Creation and/or adoption of public spaces to reduce crime and increase public security will also help mitigate environmental shocks.
Development of resilient strategies that will enable a sustainable environmental strategy for the entire 
Juarez-El Paso region.
Water 
Management
Cross-Border 
Cooperation
Public Spaces
III
IV
V
Resilient Juarez

[Page 30]
Photo credit: Agustín Lara
To strengthen cooperation among stakeholders and foster an inclusive strategy, the following cross-cutting pillars were included to provide a framework of universal, shared values:
Cross-Cutting 
Pillars
This refers to bringing representatives and those represented closer. It is characterized by open city council sessions and a professional, efficient and transparent government that is accountable and open to citizen participation. It involves recognizing the new role of citizens and strengthening the city’s public institutions based on their needs and desires. To achieve full participation and have influence on the decisions made, citizens need to be educated in the issues, well organized, vocal, vigilant, and ready for action.
All authorities have, within their jurisdiction, the obligation to foster respect, protect and guarantee the human rights of each and every inhabitant of the city, which is especially important in Juarez, a city that has suffered severely from waves of violence, threats to public security, and femicides.
Good Governance
Human Rights
Ciudad Juarez guarantees the right of its citizen, both individually and collectively, to participate in government through the various mechanisms and instruments specified by the Constitution and the Law. The goal is to enable citizens to have an impact on the government’s decision-making process and on the oversight, management, and execution of political, administrative, urban, environmental and transportation initiatives. Another goal is to guarantee equal access for all citizens to basic services, such as water, public spaces, and economic, social, cultural, and national resources that will improve their quality of life.
Citizen Participation
Resilient Juarez
03 Developing the Strategy

[Page 31]
Institutional 
Structure
Identifying how stakeholders were connected to Ciudad Juarez’s resilience was one of the primary activities in developing the Strategy. Stakeholders played a strategic role in 
This team consists of the Resilience Office staff based in Juarez, internal and external consultants, and decision makers who collaborated in defining the Juarez Resilience Strategy.
Internal Work 
Team.
This group’s primary function is to review and discuss decisions based on the Resilience Strategy and to vote on all decisions related to the stages in the Strategy’s implementation.
Resilience Directors 
Committee.
These stakeholders are from both sides of the U.S.-Mexico border, and they are important binational players who can influence the Juarez Resilience Strategy.
Regional Stakeholders.
 These stakeholders interact directly with the internal work team and play an essential part in the development and execution of the Strategy.
 Key Stakeholders.
assessing the findings included in the city Preliminary Resilience Strategy (PRA). Each stakeholder’s role and involvement in was mapped as follows:
Dimensions
Mayor of 
Juarez
Chief Resilience 
Officer
Urban Development 
General Direction
Municipal Board of 
Water and Sanitation
U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency 
Juarez Strategic Plan
Entrepreneurial Coordinating Council
Borderplex 
National Association of 
Cargo Transportation
Department of 
Health
Health and 
Community 
Development 
FEMAP
Municipal Institute for Research and 
Planning
Ciudad Juarez 
Autonomous 
University
Technology HUB
Economy and 
Society
Infrastructure and 
Environment
Health and 
Well-Being
Leadership and 
Strategy
Resilient Juarez
03 Developing the Strategy
Photo credit: Ivan Bautista

[Page 32]
03 Developing the Strategy
Strategy Pillars
Inclusive Juarez
A safe and empowered community that welcomes cultural diversity, strengthens the sense of belonging, and fosters laws and programs to empower an informed, involved, committed and responsible citizenry.
Prosperous Juarez
A city that works towards achieving a strong, diversified economy that functions in harmony with sustainable development principles while remaining competitive. 
Integrated Juarez
A city with a resilient planning model, which bases urban planning and development regulations on the city’s specific context, features and challenges, with social and community cohesion as its goal.
Adapted Juarez
A society that protects the environment and is prepared to face threats to it, that takes into account its desert climate and surroundings, and that explores various resource management methodologies.
The discovery areas were constrained by laws and public policies. However, the pillars reflect, through a lens of resilience, the ideals and aspirations that underpin the Resilience Strategy. The pillars form a strong framework for a complex system of actions. Every pillar is based on the ideas shared by local stakeholders and global 100RC members who provided their knowledge, experience, and expertise to help with the development of the 
Juarez Resilience Strategy. Here are the pillars:
The Juarez Resilience Strategy was collaboratively developed by various strategic actors, inspired by the diverse experiences of other cities, and nurtured by a wealth of ideas from a broad range of stakeholders. 
Resilient Juarez

[Page 33]
Photo credit: Luis Pegut
Ciudad Juarez is a pioneer of the resilience movement along the northern border of Mexico. It is a city that is preparing for the future by creating the conditions for an inclusive prosperity; by facing environmental, social and economic challenges through adaptation; and by fostering the well-being of all the inhabitants of the region.
Vision
Resilient Juarez

[Page 34]
Strategy 
Pillars
Photo credit: Luis Pegut
Resilient Juarez

[Page 35]
04 Strategy Pillars
4.1 Strategy structure
The Juarez Resilience Strategy is a tactical guide for government agencies acting on behalf of the public good to decision making with a resilient approach. It is also a framework of actions to ensure that citizens are prepared to face any stress or shock to the city. The Strategy is inclusive, and emphasizes the participation of vulnerable groups, such as women, young people, and children. To achieve the goal of inclusiveness, human and economic resources must be mobilized.
The Strategy consists of 4 pillars, 11 goals and 33 actions. The four pillars are the 
Strategy’s backbone. They reflect the values of Juarez society and will act as a guide to achieving the ideal of a resilient city. Eleven long-term goals underpin the Strategy’s concrete actions and are directly connected to the pillars, The 33 actions represent specific projects and tactical activities that will help Juarez meet the Strategy’s objectives. The actions vary from simple to complex, and they may be undertaken in the short, medium or long term. In addition to the actions, this document describes related initiatives by other groups in civil society, in government departments, and in academic institutions, and also introduces some of the projects fostered by the Resilience Office. 
4.2 ¿How to read action cards?
Eje al que pertenece la acción
Nombre de la Meta
Type:
Nombre de la acción
Nomenclatura
Resilience 
Qualities:
Reflexive
Resourcef
Robust
Flexible
Redundant
Inclusive
Integrated
Estado: 
Nuevo: Acción en proceso de desarrollo con alto potencial de ser desarrollada en el corto o mediano plazo.
Existente: 
Acción que ya ha sido desarrollada o está en proceso de ejecución.
Aspiracional: 
Acción que requiere de mayor investigación y planificación. 
1. Signature:
Action that is different from the others because it is critical for the building of the city’s resilience. 
2. Priority:
Action required for building resilience in the city. 
3. Supplementary: 
Action that supports or is part of a priority or a signature action.
Term:
Lead: 
Stakeholder in charge of executing the action
Stakeholders: 
Partners who will support development of the action.
Description: General description of an action. 
What has to be done? 
How is it to be done? With whom? Expected outcomes.
1. Short: Up to 2 years
2. Medium: 2 to 5 years
3. Long: More than 5 years
Indicators: Variables that enable monitoring of the project process.
Cross-Cutting Axes:
CRF: Refers to the contribution of this action in the construction of resilience in the city.
ODS:
Human rights
1.
Citizen participation
2.
Governance
3.
Resilient Juarez

[Page 36]
Photo credit: Luis Pegut
Inclusive 
Juarez
A Safe and Empowered Community
Goals:
To recover urban public and vacant spaces that can foster positive social interaction.
Expected Outcome: The citizens of Juarez will have a wide range of recreational options in green, multifunctional public spaces through the collaboration of the Government, private entities, and citizens.
1.1.
1.2.
To improve safety and security for women.
Expected Outcome: Women in 
Juarez will be able to travel freely and safely throughout the city.
Resilient Juarez

[Page 37]
Central Park
Praderas de los Oasisl
Chamizal
Oriente 
Park
Urbivilla del Prado
Juarez 
Gate
4 Siglos 
Corridor
Partido 
Romero
Resilient Juarez
As the name Inclusive Juarez suggests, this pillar stresses the importance of citizen participation in the creation and development of the city’s urban spaces—it essentially aims at getting them involved in the design of their own habitat. Juarez is a border city with almost 1.4 million inhabitants who are primarily young people. The city is also a mixture of immigrant cultures from various parts of the country. The Preliminary 
Resilience Assessment determined that the city’s infrastructure and services are insufficient, that income levels are generally low, and that the population is largely uneducated. In addition, the society is greatly polarized, with marginalized populations living in the most vulnerable areas of the city, such as the outskirts of Juarez. 
The challenges only increase as the social context in which many of the citizens of Juarez live is explored. 
The high rates of violence in recent decades and the lack of public security have increased the citizens’ sense of isolation and reluctance to interact with the world outside their homes. This is especially the case for women, given the alarming rates of femicides and disappearances. 
Thus, the resilience challenge for this pillar directly focuses on citizens and their interaction with their immediate environment. Inclusive Juarez seeks to transform and improve the living conditions of the inhabitants of 
Juarez by restoring public spaces. 
The pillar aims to make these urban areas not only places where positive social interaction can take place but where women, who are one of the most vulnerable groups in the city, can feel safe.
Inclusive 
Juarez Context
Green Spaces / Parks
These are open spaces with trees, where everyone is free to enjoy walking, relaxing, and recreation. They usually have paths, places for relaxation, and playgrounds for children. 
Ridge
Roundabout
Square
Map Source: Parks and Green Spaces 
Map. Research and Planning Municipal 
Institute (2017)
This is the road, pathway or central strip of a wide avenue or street and is generally embellished with trees and plants. It divides the traffic going in different directions and keeps vehicles from straying into the opposite lane.
This is a road construction designed to facilitate road crossings and to reduce accidents. Typically round in design, these spaces are often planted and are also used for various activities. 
This is an open space where people can gather together and engage in various civic, cultural, recreational, political or social activities.
Inclusive Juárez Inspiration Map Inclusive Juárez Context

[Page 38]
Santiago de Chile
Quito
Glasgow
Atlanta
Pittsburg
Rotterdam
Atenas
1.1.2.
1.1.3.
1.2.3.
1.1.4.
1.2.2.
1.2.1.
1.3.1.
1.1.5.
1.1.1.
Inclusive Juarez 
Inspiration Map
Santiago de Chile
Atlanta
Dakar
Design Contests 
Atlanta is promoting design contests for resilient infrastructure with institutions and universities to transform a public space into a national benchmark of resilient design for the year 2018.
E.P. Adoption 
Dakar is fostering collaboration with the private sector to promote the adoption of green spaces in the city. 
Resilient Parks
In Santiago de Chile, high-impact projects such as the New Urban 
Parks Construction Plan are increasing the number of green spaces in vulnerable areas. 
1.1.1.
1.1.2.
1.1.3.
8 Cities that inspired the pillar
Rotterdam
Pittsburg
Atenas
Glasgow
Quito
Technological Tools 
In July 2013, Athens launched the synAthina platform in order to establish a permanent and effective link between city services and citizens. Citizens can connect with each other and suggest projects that may improve their quality of life.
Community Leadership 
Glasgow is encouraging citizen involvement to build trust and a resilience culture among its citizens and institutions.
Safe Corridor 
Quito is developing Safety of Women in Public Spaces, a program to reduce the harassment of women in transportation and public spaces.
1.1.4.
1.1.5.
1.2.1.
1.2.2.
1.2.3.
Resilient Workshops 
With programs such as We-Society, 
Rotterdam is connecting various groups with the city’s wider initiatives, as it continues to increase the city’s resilience.
Empty Lot
Pittsburgh has implemented under-utilized land recovery strategies in vulnerable areas of the city to benefit the community.
Inclusive Juárez Inspiration Map
Resilient Juarez

[Page 39]
Inclusive Juárez
Term:
Signature
Medium
Reflexive
Robust
Inclusive
Integrated
Resourceful Redundant 
Flexible
CRF:
SDO:
Cross-Cutting Axes:
1.1
1.1.1 Promote and Drive the Creation of Resilient Parks
Status: 
Lead:
Stakeholders:
Indicators / Expected Outcome
New
Planning and Assessment 
General Direction
• 
SEDATU
• 
General Direction of 
Public Services
• 
Public Works General Direction
• 
Social Development 
General Direction
• 
Urban Development 
General Direction
• 
Research and Planning 
Municipal Institute + +
Number of recovered parks + +
Population benefited
Description:
Juarez has an average of 5.6 square meters of green space per inhabitant, which is below the 9 square meters of green space per inhabitant identified by the World 
Health Organization as the optimum ratio.
According to the analysis conducted by the Resilience Office during the Preliminary 
Resilience Assessment, current conditions in the city have created a need to foster positive social interaction through increasing the number of green spaces in which that interaction can take place.
One response to this challenge is a project called Resilient Parks (RP). An RP is a space that brings together green infrastructure, urban agriculture, and native plants, and that provides a place where artistic, cultural, and sports activities can take place.
An alliance between the Municipality and SEDATU will finance this project. The 
Resilience Office, in collaboration with the Planning and Assessment General 
Direction and Social Development General Direction, will identify the parks in vulnerable areas of the city that will be included in the project. In the first stage, in the period from 2018 to 2019, the General Direction department expects to create five RPs in the city. This action, which is described in the city’s Sustainable 
Urban Development Plan 2016, makes the creation of inclusive spaces a priority. In addition, as this is an action linked to the Colima Resilience Office, the Planning and 
Assessment General Direction will design a neighborhood intervention guide and explore urban design methodologies, such as tactical urbanism, with the neighbors who will use the resilient parks.
Resilience 
Qualities:
Recover Urban Public and 
Vacant Spaces to Foster Positive Social Interaction 
SDO:
Type:
Term:
Signature
Short
1.1.2 Organize the Annual Contest Let’s Enhance a Public Space.
Status: 
Lead:
Stakeholders:
New
Resilience Office 
Planning and Assessment 
General Direction
• 
Research and Planning 
Municipal Institute
• 
Public Works 
General Direction
• 
Parks and Gardens Direction
• 
Social Development 
General Direction
• 
Academic Institutions
• 
Rebuild by Design
• 
Ciudad Juarez 
Autonomous University + +
Number and square meters of recovered spaces
Description:
The annual contest “Let’s enhance a public space” is an open invitation to experts and people interested in architecture and urban planning to participate in optimizing and improving their areas, in building the city’s resilience elements into their proposals as well as planning and design processes.
The Municipal Government, academic institutions and international bodies collaborate in putting on the contest. To foster intersector inclusion, they bring together experts to act as judges and to assess and take part in the process. 
In the second half of 2017, the first contest proposal, to conduct an intervention for Juan Gabriel Great Plaza was launched. Rebuild by Design, a 100RC partner, facilitated the participatory design that was adopted to implement this initiative. 
This first version of the contest had valuable results and involved the Gehl Institute, which monitored the process and acted as judge for the projects. The winning project incorporated resilience elements, including green infrastructure, bike paths, eco-technologies, and a participatory, collaborative design process that was sensitive to the community’s culture and history. The first stage of the project will be implemented in the second half of 2018 and will end in early 2019.
An action linked to this contest is the creation of a public fund to implement the winning project using funds primarily from the Municipal Government.
Resilience 
Qualities:
1.1
CRF:
Cross-Cutting Axes:
Reflexive
Robust
Inclusive
Integrated 
Resourceful
Redundant
Flexible
Indicators / Expected Outcome
Resilient Juarez
3b 2c
1 2 3
4a 2c
1 2 3

[Page 40]
Strategic Collaboration
Rebuild by 
Design and 
Gehl Institute he joint project, the 
Urban Design Contest 
Let’s Enhance Gran 
Plaza Juan Gabriel, took place in two phases:
More than 100 students participated in the process during the workshop. 
Aimed at architecture, design, and urban planning students as well as professionals and other interested parties 
The goal of the workshop was to provide tools and methodologies for the analysis and renovation of public spaces by Rebuild By Design and the Gehl Institute.
A workshop, Public 
Life and Community, was conducted on 
September 11 and 
12,2017.
The second phase, from October 20, 
2017, to January 
18, 2018, involved the development and launch of the invitation to the contest. 
After identifying the existing challenges in the public spaces of Juarez and the lack of social cohesion and public life, the city developed alliances with Rebuild by Design and Gehl Institute to create an innovative and collaborative design proposal.
Rebuild by Design focuses on analysing and reinventing urban spaces through a community approach.
Gehl Institute is an international organization whose mission is to transform the way in which cities are shaped by making public life the driver for design, policy, and governance.
HADVD Arquitectos team submitted the winning proposal. This local architectural firm rescued conceptual elements of Juan 
Gabriel, “Juarez Diva” with organic shapes that connect the space to users and the urban context, providing the square with a resilience value-added. The project will be implemented by the city using local funds. This type of proposal process for the transformation and improvement of public spaces, which involves community participation, is expected to be repeated annually.
Alliances and collaborations with Gehl Institute were developed to train students and professionals in this participatory approach.
9 teams of participants
3 final contestants submitted their proposals to the community in a participatory process on 
December 15, 2017.
Attended by about
50 people, among them community members, decision makers and subject matter experts, who provided their feedback on the final proposals during the collaborative process.
The collaboration was extremely valuable, as it offered an alternative approach to the urban planning process.
This process achieved the goal of getting the community, especially young people, involved in reimagining and improving a public space in Juarez. 
Photos: Views of HADVD Arquitectos’ winning project for the Urban Design Contest “Let’s Enhance the Gran 
Plaza Juan Gabriel.”
Infographic Inclusive Juárez
Resilient Juarez

[Page 41]
Inclusive Juárez
Term:
Medium
Status: 
Lead:
Stakeholders:
Existing
Economic Development 
General Direction
• Resilience Office
• Social Development 
General Direction
• Industrial Associations
• Entrepreneurial Coordinating 
Council
• Index Juarez
• Civil associations + +
Incentives granted + +
Recovered area in square meters 
Description:
The project fosters social responsibility within industries, companies and local businesses through the adoption of common-use spaces such as parks, corridors and pathways. 
These entities will be able to impact these types of urban spaces through legal instruments such as coordination agreements to create safe green zones that can be used for entertainment. By encouraging solidarity and social responsibility, the Economic 
Development General Direction’s goal is to have a company or a maquiladora restore and maintain a park in a low-income district and/or parks located around their facilities for the benefit of both their workers and the community. The Economic Development 
General Direction office is leading this action and has developed a list of these spaces, including their specific features and boundaries, in order to facilitate the adoption process. 
The Economic Development General Direction invites companies to demonstrate their commitment to enhancing their local environment. 
This action includes two phases:
1. 
The Economic Development General Direction creates and updates a catalogue of available spaces that both lack infrastructure and are adjacent to companies. Given their location, these spaces have the potential for a high social impact. 
2. 
The Economic Development General Direction fosters and creates tax incentives for companies joining the program.
By late 2018, the Economic Development General Direction expects that at least 10 parks will have a sponsoring company that will provide the required maintenance, fences, mesh canopy, lighting, playgrounds for children, and bathrooms, among other benefits. 
Resilience 
Qualities
1.1
Supplementary
CRF
Cross-Cutting Axes:
Reflexive
Robust
Inclusive
Integrated Resourceful
Redundant
Flexible
1.1.3 Adoption of Public Spaces Program Design and Implementation.
SDO:
Indicators/Expected Outcome
Type:
Term:
Status: 
Lead:
Stakeholders:
Aspirational
Resilience Office
Juarez Municipality 
Culture Institute
• 
Education Direction
• 
Social Development 
General Direction
• 
Juarez Youth 
Municipal Institute
• 
Academic Institutions
• 
Civil associations + +
Number of workshops conducted + +
Number of children trained + +
Number of participant schools
Description:
This action to develop cultural, artistic, and educational skills during childhood and youth is a necessary part of building community resilience. The Resilience Office and the Juarez Municipality Culture Institute created this initiative for children and teenagers at the primary school level (6 to 15 years old). The goal is to foster the development of creative as well as intellectual and personal growth through artistic and cultural activities. 
Indirectly, this initiative will also foster civic values based on common roots and identity.
The Resilience Office and the Juarez Municipality Culture Institute will deliver an art workshop at the schools for one month and the workshop will conclude with a feature representation of the learnings.
During 2017 the international organization MasterPeace, using its project “Wall of 
Connections,” collaborated in a pilot project for this initiative. The goal was to train sixth-grade students in recreational activities (in this case, a painting workshop using the airbrush technique). The students were from Cuitlahuac, a grade school in a vulnerable area of the city, and the workshop ended with the collective construction of a mural in which students depicted their view of the city and applied their new skills.
The project’s success underscored the need to encourage and expand the personal development of the children of Juarez. Projects such as this can better prepare children to become citizens committed to their communities. The Resilience Office and the Juarez Municipality Culture Institute plan to implement this project in at least two schools in every six-month term. The workshops will start in the first half of 2018. 
The Resilience Office and the Juarez Municipality Culture Institute will pursue alliances with national and international organizations to develop the workshop programs and the skills of participants.
Resilience 
Qualities
1.1
1.1.4 Art Programs and Cultural Workshops for Children and Young 
People in Public Spaces
Signature
Short
CRF
Cross-Cutting Axes:
Reflexive
Robust
Inclusive
Integrated Resourceful
Redundant
Flexible
SDO:
Indicators/Expected Outcome
2c 1b
1 2 3
Resilient Juarez
2a 3c
1 2 3

[Page 42]
Masterpeace 
MasterPeace is an international organization dedicated to inspiring everyone to use their talent and energy to build peace and unity. It is active in 47 countries across Europe, Africa and Latin 
America. Since 2015, MasterPeace has been present in Mexico and inspiring thousands of young people, mainly in Mexico City. Through projects, campaigns, and spaces for dialogue, MasterPeace has been inspiring young people to act and work for peace, primarily through the arts.
In May 2017, MasterPeace joined the Juarez 
Resilience Office to develop a project called “Walls of Connections,” a global MasterPeace campaign to paint 100 walls in more than 40 countries. The goal is to turn walls that divide communities into symbols of connection.
 The end of the project was simple: to get a connection wall. However, to add a resilience element, the Resilience 
Office organized a spray paint workshop before the mural was created.
About 120 children attended the workshop. 
It ended with the creation of the mural.
Victor Moreno, a plastic artist from the community, delivered a workshop geared to sixth graders at Cuitlahuac grade school in the Praderas de la Sierra district at the southeast edge of the city.
The mural was a mosaic, a work of art through which the children depicted how they viewed the city, using the skills they learned in the workshop.
On May 26, 2017, the community presented the inspiring mural in which the children expressed their dreams, ideas and aspirations.
Photos credit: Luis Pegut and Diana Talavera 
Infographic Inclusive Juárez
Resilient Juarez

[Page 43]
Inclusive Juárez
The collaboration culminated with a cultural event called “PeaceTalk:
How art and culture contribute to a resilient city.”
PeaceTalks are monthly conferences organized by 
MasterPeace in which artists and social entrepreneurs share their experience in peace building with the audience.
Event participants included Sofie 
De Wulf, Director of MasterPeace 
Mexico and Latin America; Rodolfo 
Vázquez, Operations Director of Technology Hub, a binational incubator devoted to fostering innovation, entrepreneurship and industry in the region; and local artists 
Victor Moreno and Jesus Robledo,, who were the workshop instructors.
This experience led to the development of a community project called “Resilient Workshops,” which develops artistic, educational and cultural skills while reinforcing social cohesion and community involvement in the vulnerable districts of Juarez.
Photo credit Luis Pegut and Diana Talavera 
Type:
Term:
Long
Status: 
Lead:
Stakeholders:
Aspirational
Urban Development 
General Direction
• 
Resilience Office
• 
Research and Planning 
Municipal Institute
• 
Planning and Assessment 
General Direction
• 
Public Works 
General Direction
• 
Technical Direction + +
Incentives granted + +
Recovered area in square meters 
Description:
Resilience 
Qualities
1.1
Priority
1.1.5 Vacant Plots Recovery Program
CRF
Cross-Cutting Axes:
Reflexive
Robust
Inclusive
Integrated Resourceful
Redundant
Flexible
Under the Sustainable Urban Development Plan 2016, about 20% of the urban area of Juarez is vacant land or wasteland. This situation is not only one that can lead to violence but it also negatively impacts public security and the urban image of the city. This initiative focuses on increasing owner awareness of the empty lots they have in urban areas and encouraging them to allow temporary use of these lots as public spaces, mainly in areas where there are none. This action fosters the creation of green spaces that improve the quality of life throughout the city. The Urban Development General Direction is creating a mechanism that will provide incentives to wasteland owners to join the green space creation project.
The Urban Development General Direction is the agency in charge of regulating urban growth in the city and will be the project lead in a collaboration with the Planning and Assessment General Direction, the Public Services General Direction, the 
Public Works General Direction, and the Municipal Treasury Department to prepare and publish tax and legal incentives. In addition, to establish guidelines for these incentives, the Urban Development General Direction will publish a call to participate in 2018 that will be targeted to various sectors of civil society, city neighborhoods, and research organizations interested in the project:
1. 
Operation of the initiative. 
2. 
Legal support instruments. 
The purpose of this action is to ensure that this urban area becomes a compact, connected, safe, diversified and resilient city in the long term, despite its increasing population density. 
SDO:
Indicators/Expected Outcome
Resilient Juarez
3a 4c
1 2 3

[Page 44]
Inclusive Juárez
Term:
Status: 
Lead:
Stakeholders:
Existing
Municipal Government
• 
General IT Direction
• 
Social Communication 
General Coordination
• 
Municipal Institute for Women
• 
Public security Direction
• 
Social Media Coordination + +
Number of apps developed + +
Number of downloads
Description:
The Municipal Government has developed several virtual applications (apps) for mobile devices to increase the safety of women and other citizens in the city. 
Examples of these apps are “No estoy sola” (I am not alone) and “Seguridad 
Ciudadana” (Citizen Safety), which enable users to make emergency phone calls for assistance and safety.
This initiative fosters the creation and distribution of apps and the adoption of new virtual trends. In addition, the Municipal Government, jointly with the 
Municipal Institute for Women and the Public Security Direction, will create local and international social media campaigns to encourage the use of these apps.
This action will reduce the current communications gap between the Municipal 
Government and the city’s citizens during emergencies and other situations.
The Municipal Government expects to develop new applications that can offer a better response when the city needs to address environmental events, traffic jams, vehicle traffic, and other challenges. The Municipal Government will invite the community and everyone interested in developing these apps to participate, will encourage more development of this type of communications technology, and will capitalize on local talent.
Resilience 
Qualities
Improve the Safety of Women in the City
1.2
1.2.1 Technology Apps for Citizen Safety and Security
Supplementary
Short
CRF
Cross-Cutting Axes:
Reflexive
Robust
Inclusive
Integrated 
Resourceful
Redundant
Flexible
SDO:
Indicators/Expected Outcome
Type:
Term:
Status: 
Lead:
Stakeholders:
Aspirational
Juarez Strategic Plan 
Resilience Office
• 
Social Development 
General Direction
• 
Municipal Institute for Women
• 
Community Centers 
General Direction
• 
Civil Associations
• 
Academic Institutions + +
Number of community leaders + +
Programs implemented
Description:
With this action, the Resilience Office will create a program to identify and train community leaders as part of the municipality’s planning processes. Identifying leaders who can successfully implement programs and actions within their communities is critically important, especially as these community leaders will have local contacts, understand local issues, and be involved in alliances with various stakeholders within their communities. This action facilitates collaboration between government agencies and the city’s communities, and strengthens the ties between them.
In the past the women of Juarez have shown a greater commitment to programs that focus on improving their quality of life, so this action targets them first.
The Resilience Office will conduct this work jointly with the city’s network of neighborhoods, which have experience in identifying leaders in various districts. The community leadership program will include public assemblies, citizenship training seminars, and other types of support activities. By late 
2018, the Resilience Office will have program operation guidelines and a pilot project in place.
Resilience 
Qualities
1.2
1.2.2 Community Leadership Program
Supplementary
Medium
CRF
Cross-Cutting Axes:
Reflexive
Robust
Inclusive
Integrated 
Resourceful
Redundant
Flexible
SDO:
Indicators/Expected Outcome
Resilient Juarez
2b 3a
1 2 3
2c 4a
1 2 3

[Page 45]
allowed to take part, and they have 3 minutes to voice their opinions at each session. 
These are transparent, as they enable participation and live broadcasting.
Juarez is currently the only Mexican municipality with open city council sessions.
The broadcasting takes place through the official social media sites of the 
City of Juarez (YouTube and Facebook) 
The objective is to build a better city through a democratic process
For an “open” session, three key factors are required:
Citizens must be present and involved in preliminary and working sessions of the City Council
Citizen initiatives must be allowed to be introduced 
Sessions must be broadcast live
Three citizens are 
Open City Council
Local capsule:
This initiative enables citizens to have a say in ordinary and extraordinary sessions of the City 
Council, in meetings prior to those sessions, and in meetings with decision makers.
July 7 
2017
Fue la primera reunión previa a la sesión de Cabildo
July 12
The first open city council session was conducted
53 sessions have been conducted under this system
23 people have participated in ordinary and extraordinary sessions
9 people have taken part in preliminary sessions reaching up to 
20,000 online viewers.
Capsule Inclusive Juárez
Resilient Juarez

[Page 46]
Inclusive Juárez
Term:
Status: 
Lead:
Stakeholders:
Existing
Municipal Institute for Women
• Municipal Center for the Arts
• Commission for Women and 
Gender Equality
• Family Comprehensive Development 
• Direction of Commerce
• Human Rights and Assistance to 
Migrants Direction
• Social Development General Direction
• Urban Development General Direction
• Planning and Assessment General Direction
• General IT Direction
• Public Works General Direction
• General Direction of Public Services
• Municipal General Direction of Transit
• Research and Planning Municipal Institute
• Municipal Sports Institute
• Cultural Institute of Juarez Municipality
• Resilience Office in Juarez
• Municipal Public Security Direction + +
Number of successful courses + +
Number of attendees + +
Urban-architectural proposal of the 
Safe corridor
Description:
Juarez is known globally for the large number of feminicides committed in the city. To address this, the Municipal Institute for Women developed a project called “Safe Corridor for Women.” This project targets the city’s historical district, which is an area that has been marked by violence and a lack of security. It is also a place where many women have disappeared.
Besides the office of the Municipal Institute for Women, the project includes safe areas, panic buttons, and policed safety and pink zones that give priority to women and girls. The motto of the project is “If it is safe for women, it is safe for everyone.” The project signifies a radical change in the city’s response to violence against women and a new vision for achieving safety and security in the city.
The Resilience Office, working jointly with the Municipal Institute for 
Women, will design various actions, such as a proposal for a sustainable gender-oriented urban design, courses on women’s empowerment, and the establishment of urban orchards to help families economically. To get the project off the ground, the Resilience Office will liaise with other 100RC cities to benefit from their experience and to learn best practices. Through this international collaboration and knowledge sharing, it is hoped that the project will achieve a new level of security for the women of Juarez and transform the world’s negative view of the city.
Resilience 
Qualities
1.2
1.2.3 “Safe Corridor for Women”
Priority
Medium
CRF
SDO:
Cross-Cutting Axes:
Reflexive
Robust
Inclusive
Integrated 
Resourceful
Redundant
Flexible
Indicators/Expected Outcome
Type:
Term:
Status: 
Lead:
Stakeholders:
Aspirational
Resilience Office
• 
Municipal Public 
Security Direction
• 
Academic Institutions
• 
Safety and Violence 
Prevention Observatories
• 
Social Development 
General Direction
• 
Municipal Institute for Women
• 
Civic Associations
• 
100RC Member Cities
• 
Economic Development + +
Cities belonging to ISSIN + +
Scheduled meetings + +
Agreements achieved + +
Agreement creation signature
Description:
The extraordinarily high rates of violence in the city in the last 10 years require transformative actions to address public security and violence. However, this challenge is not exclusive to the city but should be explored and addressed on regional, national, and international levels.
During the Resilience Summit held in 2017, the CRO and representatives of cities with public security challenges met and agreed on the creation of an International 
Safety and Social Inclusion Network (ISSIN).
Cities included in the network in this first stage are:
• 
Mexico: Juarez, Colima, and CDMX
• 
Estados Unidos: Chicago, Nueva Orleans and San Luis.
• 
Colombia: Medellín and Cali.
• 
Argentina: Santa Fe. 
The purpose of the network is to create a permanent communication channel among cities that have suffered from organized crime-related violence in order to mitigate the effects caused by criminals by sharing successful experiences as an aid for an effective construction of public policy on safety matters. In addition, it will foster meetings with mayors and decision-makers on public security matters. 
Every ISSIN member will monitor the establishment of social programs to accompany the process to prevent violence at a micro-local level. The Resilience Office first expected outcome from this network is the creation of the First International 
Exchange Forum on Good Public Security Experiences at Ciudad Juarez during the last half of 2018.
Resilience 
Qualities
1.2
1.2.4 International Safety and Social Inclusion Network (ISSIN) 
Signature
Short
CRF
Cross-Cutting Axes:
Reflexive
Robust
Inclusive
Integrated 
Resourceful
Redundant
Flexible
SDO:
Indicators/Expected Outcome
Resilient Juarez
2b 4b 4c
1 2 3
2c 4a
1 2 3

[Page 47]
Safe Corridor for Women
The Municipal Government is dedicated to preventing gender violence and to recovering the historical district of Juarez.
Transforming the existing image of the city on gender issues is a parallel goal.
The goal is the creation of an urban environment where women feel safe and are completely free to exercise their rights as citizens
In the last 
24 years femicides in 2017 only, there was a record of women murdered and 23 women disappeared
1,572 femicides
Given these figures, the 
Municipal Institute for 
Women proposed the creation of a safe corridor for women in the historical district of Juarez. 
Strategies like this aim to reduce the number of violent acts against women. Secure spaces include panic buttons, public security, and interactive digital stations. The Municipal 
Government’s goal is to empower women and their families through artistic, cultural, sports and economic activities.
“To me, being resilient means knowing that I am safe at all times no matter where I am” 
App I am not alone
This is an application for mobile telephones that enables users to keep family and friends informed in an emergency or dangerous situation. It is a part of a state-of-the-art effort by the independent 
Municipal Administration to use technological tools to increase public security and lower the safety risk in Juarez neighborhoods
The app is free.
No Internet service is required. Just network and cell phone credit need to be available
The app is compatible with 
Android devices and will soon be available for iOS
Alerts will be automatically sent when the cell phone is shaken. The alerts are in the form of a text message that can be customized to request help The text message also sends the geo-referred location of the person in peril.
The app has had more than 50,000 downloads from Google Play and has 20,000 active accounts. It has been downloaded not only in 
Mexico, but also in Spain and Chile.
The current release of the app is the 1.2 version, which has enhanced settings and minor bug fixes for sending SMS.
The app was officially launched on July 5, 2017, and the average user rating is 4. 0.
Verónica Corchado
The app allows the user to pre-set it to contact five people in case of an emergency
Photo credit: Carlos Guardado 
Local capsule:
Capsule Inclusive Juárez
Resilient Juarez

[Page 48]
Photo credit: Luis Pegut
Prosperous 
Juarez
A strong, diverse and competitive economy
Goals:
Juarez is a Model of Innovation and 
Competitiveness. 
Expected Outcome: Juarez will have a more diversified economy that will increase productivity and offer more stable, well-paid job opportunities, especially for women and young people.
2.1.
2.2.
2.3.
Foster New Business Models with a 
Circular Economy. 
Expected Outcome: Companies in Juarez will reduce their waste production in a sustainable manner and will foster consumption of local products and services, creating jobs and economic activity.
Enhance the Image of Juarez and Its 
Tourist Appeal. 
Expected Outcome: The city of Juarez will move away from its past as the most violent city in the world, reinventing itself as an appealing destination for its cultural and tourist attractions, and building among its citizens a shared sense of identity and pride in their city.
Resilient Juarez

[Page 49]
Juarez is strategically located at the border of 
Mexico-and the United States. At this border, there is a continuous flow of capital from the export maquiladora industry (IME). This location encourages investments of all kinds and attracts many people seeking better working conditions. 
Consequently, there is a high demand for services, networks, and infrastructure, which is resulting in an ongoing expansion of urban sprawl. IME has defined the current face of the city. Between 
2000 and 2010, the city attracted 75% of the direct foreign investment in Chihuahua State and was the largest contributor to the state’s gross domestic product at 43% (Padilla, 2012: 898). 
Although the IME sector provides 66.5% of the formal jobs in the city, IME’s environmental impact degrades the city and pollutes its ecosystem and natural resources irreversibly.
The figures in the urban competitiveness index for 2016 showed a city with a low unemployment rate. Nevertheless, the challenges at the border are not lack of employment, but the low income level of almost 40% of the population, which only earn the minimum wage and lack even a rudimentary level of education. The school desertion rate is 6% in secondary school and 17% in high school. Per data provided by Coneval, by 
2015 39.9% of the population had incomes that fell below the poverty line, 14.5% had low incomes and few opportunities due to a lack of skills and inadequate education, and 13.7% suffered due to lack of access to food.
Context
Prosperous Juarez 
This pillar focuses on the need to diversify the current economic model through innovation, competitiveness, and respect for the environment. 
Needed are green jobs that are of a better quality and better paid if a more sustainable future is to be achieved. Another aspect of this pillar is the initiative to transform the international image of Juarez by improving conditions in the city so that it becomes known for its culture and history.
40% is paid minimum wage.
6% is the school desertion rate in secondary school.
39.9% of the population had incomes below the poverty line, per Coneval data for 2015.
17% is the school desertion rate in high school.
High
Medium - high
Medium
Medium - low low
Socioeconomic level:
Maquilas *
These are manufacturing facilities conducting industrial activities such as production, transformation, assembly, storage and distribution. These companies operate internationally, as they typically import raw materials and export products made from them to other countries.
Industrial park *
This is a geographically limited area that has been especially designed for manufacturing plants (maquiladoras) with respect to location, infrastructure, facilities and services, and that is managed by a permanent administration.
*Source: Sociodemographic and economic analysis update of the Urban Development Program for Ciudad Juarez, 
Chihuahua. Georeferenced Directory of industrial parks, areas, and industries in Juarez. Research and Planning 
Municipal Institute 2014
Map Source: Socioeconomic Levels Map. 
Observatorio Ciudadano de Prevención, 
Seguridad y Justicia de Chihuahua. (Chihuahua Prevention, Safety and Justice 
Citizen Observatory) FICOSEC (2015)
Prosperous Juarez Inspiration Map 
Context Prosperous Juarez
Resilient Juarez

[Page 50]
Santiago de Chile
Santa Fe
Pittsburg
Tesalónica
Amman
2.2.1.
2.1.3.
2.2.2.
2.1.2.1.
Medellín
2.1.2.
2.3.2.
Atenas
2.3.1.
Semarang
2.1.1.
2.2.1.1.
2.3.3.
Prosperous Juarez 
Inspiration Map
Innovation Workshops for 
Children and Young People 
Medellin fosters the development of educational programs to awaken the enthusiasm and interest of young people in science, technology and innovation.
Support Fund 
Impact Santiago Co-Creation 
Program drives the Innovation and Competitiveness 
Funds (FIC) to strengthen scientific research.
Indicators System
Semarang uses data analysis to foster efficiency in economic interventions, with a flexible and sustainable approach to commercial practices.
2.1.1.
2.1.2.
2.1.2.1. 
10 Cities that inspired the pillar
Semarang
Medellín
Santiago de Chile
Economic Development 
Forums 
Semarang designed an Economic Development Forum and Job Promotion project, which has a great potential to reduce unemployment in the city.
+A-D Strategy 
As an example of a circular economy, the 412 Food Rescue initiative collects fresh, healthy food and distributes it directly to community organizations serving those in need.
Brand
Athens is a vibrant city that improved its global image and fostered a new sense of belonging.
2.1.3.
2.2.1.
2.2.1.1. 
2.2.2.
2.3.1.
Women Empowerment 
Amman is promoting a plan that brings women into the city’s workforce and that supports entrepreneurship and job opportunities.
Municipal Sustainability and Circular 
Economy Program 
Is implementing the principles of a circular economy to improve recycling rates, grow environmental awareness, and create new local economic opportunities.
Touristic-Cultural 
Scenarios
Santa Fe fosters projects that promote the natural and cultural riches of the region and develops proposals for economic and workforce decision making as part of its effort to safeguard and protect the city against natural disasters.
2.3.2.
Ecotourism
Semarang develops ecological and educational tourism that makes the most of the region’s potential in order to expand the local economy.
2.3.3.
Semarang
Semarang
Santa Fe
Amman
Tesalónica
Pittsburg
Atenas
Prosperous Juarez Inspiration Map 
Resilient Juarez

[Page 51]
Photo credit: Carlos Guardado
Cross-Cutting Axes:
Type:
Term:
Priority
Medium
Reflexive
Robust
Inclusive
Integrated
Resourceful
Redundant
Flexible
2.1
2.1.1 Economic Competitiveness Indicators System
Status: 
Lead:
Stakeholders:
New
Economic Development 
General Direction
• 
Mexican Institute for 
Competitiveness 
• 
Industrial Associations
• 
Academic Institutions
• 
Economic Development
• 
Civil associations
• 
Entrepreneurial Coordinating 
Council + +
Implementation of the indicators system + +
Annual publication of the monitoring 
Description:
This action is based on the need to know where and how the city is positioned in terms of competitiveness and innovation, so that guidelines can be developed for building a sustainable economic model that can serve as an inspiration for other cities along Mexico’s northern border. The Economic Development General Direction will use the indicators system to establish and quantify some key elements for achieving high productivity and increasing income levels. These elements should prove useful to decision makers and support economic growth in the city.
The Economic Development General Direction and the Juarez Resilience Office will jointly complete these actions with the advice from the Mexican Institute for Competitiveness (IMCO), which will assist them in preparing a design guide for building the indicators. The project’s stages are as follows:
1. 
IMCO will train personnel to prepare the indicators.
2. 
The Economic Development General Direction, jointly with all involved stakeholders, will create a database that will include all required information.
3. 
The Economic Development General Direction will design and build indicators
4. 
The Economic Development General Direction will implement the indicators and .monitor competitiveness and innovation under a sustainable development model.
The Economic Development General Direction will carry out the first and second stage during 2018.
The Economic Development General Direction will conclude the design and implementation during the first half of 2019.
Resilience 
Qualities
Make Juarez a Model of Innovation and Competitiveness 
SDO:
Indicators/Expected Outcome
4c 2a 
1 2 3
Prosperous Juárez
Resilient Juarez

[Page 52]
Prosperous Juárez
Cross-Cutting Axes:
Type:
Term:
Supplemental
Short
2.1.2 Develop Innovation and Technology Workshops for 
Children and Young People
Status: 
Lead:
Stakeholders:
New
Education Direction
• 
Education Direction
• 
Industrial Associations
• 
Resilience Office
• 
Juarez Starts Network
• 
Economic Development 
General Direction
• 
Academic Institutions + +
Collaboration agreement + +
Training plan using descriptive charts + +
Number of workshops conducted
Description:
Children and young people are the most vulnerable groups in Juarez society. The 
Education Direction must implement actions that will allow them to achieve their potential and ensure a future with more opportunities. Investing in girls and boys is betting on the future of the city. 
The Education Direction will use Innovation and Technology Workshops to give children and young people creative tools for developing new skills and will focus on science and technology learning through the creation of original, innovative projects and scientific discovery. This action aims to foster creativity and reposition 
Juarez as a city of innovation. 
The Municipal Education Direction, the Resilience Office, various academic institutions and the T-Hub will jointly implement this action.
Stages:
1. 
The Education Direction will create a social service program in which engineering students will serve as workshop instructors. (Second half of 2018).
2. 
The Education Direction will design workshops that will become part of the curriculum in primary and secondary schools. (First half of 2019).
3. 
The Education Direction will conduct workshops that will motivate children and young people to continue attending school as well as develop their potential for innovation. (Second half of 2019).
Resilience 
Qualities
2.1
Reflexive
Robust
Inclusive
Integrated
Resourceful
Redundant
Flexible SDO:
Indicators/Expected Outcome
1b 2c
1 2 3
Robust
Integrated
Resourceful
2.1.2.1. Support Fund for Innovative and Creative Talents (FATIC)
Status: 
Lead:
Stakeholders:
Indicators:
Aspirationall 
Economic Development 
General Direction
• 
Resilience Office
• 
Technical Direction
• 
Ciudad Juarez Autonomous 
University
• 
Academic Institutions
• 
Civil Associations
• 
Technology Hub
• 
Education Direction + +
Funds for implementation + +
Financed Projects
Description:
As part of the strategy for the design and implementation of workshops for children and young people on innovation and technology, the Economic Development General Direction is considering the creation of a fund to support innovative projects locally that foster a diversified economy that will strengthening the city.
The Fund will be an annual allocation of resources to improve the city’s competitivity and to finance economic development, research and development, and innovation programs and projects. The Fund will encourage knowledge transfer to the manufacturing sector, increase development opportunities, and improve the quality of life in the city. 
The three levels of government, industrial associations, academic institutions and civic organizations must be involved and participate in the Fund’s process for defining the rules and mechanisms for accessing Fund resources.
The Economic Development General Direction must make the operation of the 
Fund transparent and participatory, and its focus must be on the long term.
Resilience 
Qualities
Cross-Cutting 
Axes:
CRF
Inclusive
Type:
Term:
Priority
Medium
Photo credit: Norberto Diaz
Resilient Juarez

[Page 53]
Technology Hub 
Open to the public in 2015 by a private initiative, Technology 
Hub is a binational entrepreneurship and innovation ecosystem located on the site that formerly hosted the General United 
States Consulate in Juarez.
This project is part of the region’s economic consolidation
By recovering an abandoned corridor in the city and offering opportunities to entrepreneurs and young innovators, it provides easy access to business creation and development tools.
It is also a place of convergence for:
The academy
Industry
The 
Government
Society
Through various events, including conferences, workshops, pitch sessions, and art expos, experts and investors provide support to various groups and prepare them to complete their projects.
Robotics
Artificial Intelligence
3D Modeling
Technology Hub hosts more than 
60 companies and start-ups specializing in 
Innovative technologies:
+ 3,000 young people benefit yearly at no cost by taking part in training, motivation and high-level coaching activities on innovation and entrepreneurship. 
It also offers affordable courses on topics such as:
Virtual reality
Energy
Branding
Data 
Mining
Artificial 
Intelligence
Fundación 
Axcel, A.C.
FAB LAB 
Juárez
Through
Technology Hub 
Conducts projects with a social impact for community enrichment, thanks to the collaboration of private sector, industry and 
Government donors. 
Photo credit: Luis Pegut
Local capsule:
Resilient Juarez
Capsule Prosperous Juarez

[Page 54]
Local capsule:
Cross-Cutting Axes:
Type:
Term:
Supplemental
Short
2.1.3 Women Economic and Social Empowerment Workshops in Ciudad Juarez
Status: 
Lead:
Stakeholders:
New
Economic Development 
General Direction 
Resilience Office
• 
Juarez Starts Network
• 
Community Centres 
General Direction
• 
Juarez Youth Municipal 
Institute
• 
Municipal Institute for 
Women
• 
Academic Institutions
• 
Industrial Associations + +
Training Plan + +
Number of workshops conducted + +
Number of women involved + +
Businesses started
Description
Women have been seriously affected by the rates of violence in Juarez. Today, however, women have turned that challenge into a catalyst for change. A range of projects are now encouraging women to get involved in the local economy. According to the National Institute of 
Entrepreneurs, to date only 19% of the country’s entrepreneurs are women. This action is therefore a commitment to support and foster an entrepreneurial culture and to create workshops designed specifically for women. Participants in these workshops will be empowered to contribute to the city’s entrepreneurship and economic growth. 
The action plan includes the following elements: 
1. 
Training in business entrepreneurship
2. 
Skills training in business promotion and development.
3. 
Preparation of pre-incubation and incubation proposals.
The Municipal Institute for Women and local community centers will coordinate and conduct the project. At the state level, the Economic 
Development and Innovation Direction will establish collaboration and funding agreements. 
Resilience 
Qualities
2.1
Reflexive
Robust
Inclusive
Integrated
Resourceful
Redundant
Flexible
Indicators/Expected Outcome
SDO:
1b 2a
1 2 3
Project Ni en more
The project invests in empowering women through social innovation and the development of a sustainable clothing business in Juarez, Mexico.
In 1998 she started a protest against the murders of women in the city. 
Unfortunately, in 2011 she became one more victim. “NI EN 
MORE”
A mix of Spanish, 
Norwegian and English, it means “Not One 
More”, and was inspired by poet and activist Susana Chavez 
Castillo
Vision
Mission
To promote a job source for women in vulnerable conditions to give them not charity, but the opportunity to become economically independent.
Women involved in NI EN MORE live in high- risk areas of Juarez where there is no infrastructure and their safety is always a concern.
To create a resilient work space and a community center for women and girls.
To learn more about the project or to become one of our sponsors or donors, please visit 
Art + Fashion + Activism +
Social Change = NI EN MORE
Capsule Prosperous Juarez
Resilient Juarez

[Page 55]
Prosperous Juárez
Cross-Cutting Axes:
Type:
Term:
Priority
Medium
2.2.1 Municipal Sustainability and Circular Economy Program
Status: 
Lead:
Stakeholders:
Existing
Resilience Office
• 
Economic Development
• 
Economic Development 
General Direction
• 
IMMEX Juarez
• 
Industrial Associations
• 
Juarez Starts Network
• 
Academic Institutions
• 
Civic Organizations + +
Document completed
Description:
Resilience 
Qualities
Circular Economy 
2.2
Reflexive
Robust
Inclusive
Integrated
Resourceful
Redundant
Flexible to Foster New Business Models 
This action will develop a program that will enable the municipality to transform solid waste into resources for new products and services, to reduce the amount of waste the city generates, to encourage recycling, to expand environmental awareness, and to create new local economic opportunities. 
The Resilience Office will develop this action with the public stakeholders in charge of sustainable development in the region, representatives of companies and maquiladoras, private companies, and people who want to contribute to the welfare of the city. The program must include the following phases:
1. 
The Resilience Office will identify waste types by company, timing and amount.
2. 
The Resilience Office will create a portfolio of interested companies, identify their waste needs, and review ecological standards for companies.
3. 
The Resilience Office will document the processes conducted by a company, entity, or region with respect to raw materials, waste, emissions and discharges, as well as materials and energy exchanged (Torres-Marin et al., 2009; 68).
4. 
The Resilience Office will establish operational guidelines and acquisition methods (donations, moderate fees, and exchanges).
5. 
The Resilience Office will hold forums about new economic development projects that foster diversification
Indicators/Expected Outcome
SDO:
2b 4b
1 2 3
CRF
Cross-Cutting Axes:
Type:
Term:
Supplemental
Medium
Reflexive
Robust
Inclusive
Integrated
Resourceful
Redundant
Flexible
2.2
2.2.2 Strategy “+A-D: Más Alimento, Menos Desperdicio” (More Food, 
Less Waste)
Status: 
Lead:
Stakeholders:
New
Ecology Direction 
Resilience Office
• 
Municipal Institute for 
Women
• 
Economic Development 
General Direction
• 
Juarez Youth Municipal 
Institute
• 
Industrial Associations
• 
Academic Institutions
• 
Civic Organizations
• 
Chihuahua Entrepreneurs 
Food Bank + + Number of agreements executed + +
Number of beneficiaries
Description:
Resilience 
Qualities
The National Development Plan has established processes in Mexico to benefit diet, health and education. At a local level, only a few civic organizations have agreed to recycle unused food and channel it into community soup kitchens. The challenge is compelling because 
14% of the population of Juarez need access to food, according to data published by Coneval in 2015. Per the Cleaning Direction, 1,300 tons of garbage are not separated for organic waste, and therefore it is difficult to set an accurate figure for the elements that might be recycled. Sectors producing more waste are central supply stations, self-service stores, restaurants, hotels and markets.
The +A-D Strategy aims to reduce waste from human consumption of organic leftovers and promotes the best use of food. The program phases are as follows: 
1. 
The Resilience Office will get involvement from various stakeholders from private initiative and government officers on health matters to understand the waste problem and the benefits on food safety.
2. 
The Resilience Office will pursue the inclusion in the health regulations of a process for donating edible food.
3. 
The Resilience Office will execute agreements with groups such as CANIRAC, small merchants, restaurant owners, grocery stores, and major convenience store chains to encourage donations of food in good condition to civic organizations, which will in turn channel the food to community soup kitchens or social assistance centers.
For this action, the Resilience Office requires the involvement and collaboration of a range of stakeholders that understand the challenge and can identify the best solutions so that the city can adjust its regulations on health issues.
SDO:
Indicators/Expected Outcome
1a 3c 2c
1 2 3
Resilient Juarez

[Page 56]
Cross-Cutting Axes:
Type:
Term:
Signature
Short
2.3.1 Transform the Public Image of Juarez 
Status: 
Lead:
Stakeholders:
New
Resilience Office
• 
Economic Development 
General Direction
• 
Juarez Youth Municipal 
Institute
• 
Municipal Institute for 
Women
• 
Academic Institutions
• 
Industrial Associations
• 
Civil associations + +
Project completed
Description:
In the last decade, Juarez has been stigmatized as dangerous and violent, which has impacted tourism and investments as well as highlighted the negative perception of the city among inhabitants. 
The Resilience Office has adopted this action to design a marketing program that will build, communicate and maintain a positive image of the city and help construct a new identify for Juarez while encouraging development opportunities that will appeal to investors, tourists and new residents.
The project will be developed in phases:
1. 
The Resilience Office will conduct a marketing and perception survey.
2. 
The Resilience Office will analyze and provide a summary of the survey results.
3. 
The Resilience Office will develop a plan for improving the city’s image.
4. The Resilience Office will conduct a review of best practices
5. 
The Resilience Office will identify and establish mechanisms that enable agreements with key stakeholders.
6. The Resilience Office will prepare a proposal.
Resilience 
Qualities
2.3
Reflexive
Robust
Inclusive
Integrated
Resourceful
Redundant
Flexible
Juarez
Positive Image and Tourist Appeal 
SDO:
Indicators/Expected Outcome
1b 2a
1 2 3
Photo credit: Edgar Picazo
Prosperous Juárez
Resilient Juarez

[Page 57]
Prosperous Juárez
Cross-Cutting Axes:
Type:
Term:
Supplemental
Medium
Reflexive
Robust
Inclusive
Integrated
Resourceful
Redundant
Flexible
2.3
2.3.2 Promote Tourism and Culture in Juarez 
Status: 
Lead:
Stakeholders:
New
IPACULT
Economic Development
• 
Economic Development 
General Direction
• 
Juarez Youth Municipal 
Institute
• 
Municipal Institute for Women
• 
Academic Institutions
• 
Ministry of Tourism (State)
• 
Ministry of Economy (State)
• 
Municipal Public Security 
Direction + +
Project completed
Description:
This action will design a plan that drives the creation of cultural and tourist destinations in Juarez. It will diversify tourism in this border city that straddles two different cultures.by recovering the city’s unique historical features and sites with the potential to attract tourists.
The Federal Government has promoted the Agenda for Competitiveness in which 
Juarez is identified as one of the major cities with the greatest tourist potential. 
The action aims to serve as a link between actions and strategies that have begun at other levels and in other areas.
IPACULT and Economic Development will prepare plan for tourist destinations as follows: 
1. 
IPACULT and Economic Development will prepare a historical assets inventory that includes areas with historical value, such as the Cathedral, Chamizal or Zaragoza town.
2. 
IPACULT and Economic Development will evaluate building conditions and will design programs for the restoration of a building, an asset or an area.
3. 
IPACULT and Economic Development will restore areas that are part of the city’s history
4. 
IPACULT and Economic Development will promote the city unique sites, such as Mision de San Jose, Senecu, Casa de Adobe, and San Lorenzo..
Resilience 
Qualities
SDO:
Indicators/Expected Outcome
2a 2c 3c
1 2 3
CRF
Cross-Cutting Axes:
Type:
Term:
Supplemental
Short
2.3.3 Promote Ecotourism in Desert Settings
Status: 
Lead:
Stakeholders:
New
Technical Direction
• 
Tourism Direction
• 
Juarez Youth Municipal Institute
• 
Ministry of Economy (State)
• 
Ministry of Tourism (State)
• 
Sectur
• 
Conabio
• 
Conanp
• 
Ejido owners + +
Ecotourism management plan + +
Valle de Juarez Programme
Description:
Resilience 
Qualities
2.3
Reflexive
Robust
Inclusive
Integrated
Resourceful
Redundant
Flexible
This action will encourage tourism in areas of a natural beauty and great biological wealth, such as Valle Agricola or Medanos de Samalayuca. These protected areas are iconic landscapes of the city and prime examples of the natural wealth of Juarez. This action will results in economic benefits and will also raise local awareness of the importance of preserving natural areas, which are so critical for the well-being of society as a whole. In recognizing the city’s natural heritage, the city’s inhabitants will also be strengthening their sense of identity as citizens of Juarez. The sustainable, planned development of tourism will help reduce environmental, sociocultural and ethnic challenges. The Federal Government is promoting ecotourism in a desert landscape at the national level in “Master Framework of Ecotourism, Rural 
Tourism and Adventure Tourism,” which advocates full and responsible use of the country’s natural and cultural heritage. 
• 
Technical Direction will prepare a handbook for ecotourism management of 
Medanos de Samalayuca with ejido owners in accordance with the Tourism in Protected Areas Program.
• 
Technical Direction will set up a program establishing Valle de Juarez as an agricultural space within a semi-desert zone.
SDO:
Indicators/Expected Outcome
3c 4c
1 2 3
Resilient Juarez

[Page 58]
Photo credit: Luis Pegut
Integrated 
Juarez
A model of resilient planning
Goals:
3.1.
3.2.
3.3.
Civic Rights 
Expected Outcome: The city of Juarez will be an example of resilient planning. 
The city’s historical district will be transformed into an urban area where the fundamental rights of all citizens are respected and enforced and will be a hub for tourism, business and culture.
Resilient Planning 
Expected Outcome: To its vulnerability in the long term, Juarez will renew its strategic planning processes, led by a resilience office that will synthesize the views of local government, the private sector, academia and citizens.
Alternate Connectivity and 
Mobility Plan
Expected Outcome: Juarez will be a leader in the planning and implementation of alternative modes of safe, efficient and affordable transportation and will reduce travel times in the city.
Resilient Juarez

[Page 59]
Las Torres
Historic District
PRONAF
Misiones
Gran Patio 
Zaragoza
Suroriente
City of 
Knowledge
The city of Juarez has undergone exponential urban growth in the last few decades, a situation that has resulted in poor management of services and resources, which in turn has increased the city’s challenges. Juarez should have strategies in place to better connect it with sections of the city that have been cut off from city services and resources. The city should adopt new, innovative urban management strategies and foster alternative and sustainable mobility systems, especially, for the existing industrial parks and the area along its northern border, which have the highest employment density. 
At present there is a disconnection between the regulations on growth and development in the city and the urban reality. Despite the many regulations on urban development put in place since the late 1970s, the city still faces mobility challenges, lacks a vision for sustainable growth, and has no laws or regulations to guide urban development decisions and/or the execution of urban interventions. 
The city lacks a multi-modal transportation system, which results in a poor transportation network that does not provide proper service to all users. All modes of public transportation in the city share a common destination, downtown. By 
2014, 13 million trips were made by car and there were 14 million kilometers traveled.11 Juarez is now designing a Comprehensive Mobility Plan that will bring together the BRT12 and bicycle lanes. Given the complexity of the challenge, the plan is moving very slowly. Meanwhile the restoration of the Historic District is a milestone of great social and urban importance. Not only has the district been at the center of the city’s history, it is the site where the first official contact with the United States took place and where buildings of national significance still stand.
Context
Integrated Juarez
Map Source: Transportation Lines Map. 
Urban Land Analytics Laboratory. 
Arquitecture Institute, Diseño y Arte, Ciudad 
Juarez Autonomous University (2016) (Territorial Urban Analysis Laboratory. 
Architecture, Design and Art Institute, 
Ciudad Juarez Autonomous University)
11. Bicycle Mobility Plan and integration into the Public 
Transportation System, City of Ciudad Juarez, February 2015. 
12. Bus Rapid Transit (BRT).
Despite the deterioration the Historic District has suffered and the negative image it has had, the area is still economically active and socially vibrant. 
The Research and Planning Municipal Institute (IMIP) took the first step by preparing the Master Plan of Ciudad Juarez Historic District. The plan, which is based on a detailed analysis of the area, proposes strategic actions per area of activity. In addition, the Planning Direction created the Historic District Board of Patrons to advise in this makeover of the city’s image and to propose projects and raise funds to execute them. 
The board will provide new funding options and guarantee transparency on project approval and resource allocation. In short, this example of innovative urban planning is a path to guaranteeing full access to the city by all its inhabitants. 
Public security, forums for the peaceful exchange of ideas, collective participation in urban development and planning, and exercises in solidarity are also required. The common interest of the individual and the right to property are embedded in the individual right to the city, which implies the right to a fair, environmentally sustainable use of the city’s resources and services (Sanchez-Almanza, 2012).
The actions under this pillar address the right to the city, the integration of resilient planning, the drive toward sustainable mobility, and the rehabilitation of the Historic District. 
Downtown
Subcenters 
Routes
Integrated Juarez Inspiration Map 
Resilient Juarez
Context Integrated Juarez

[Page 60]
New Orleans
Integrated Juarez 
Inspiration Map
Santa Fe
Historic District 
Santa Fe is implementing a master plan to save a unique historic site and to transform the sprawling area into an integrated space with an urban vision for the city..
Resilience Institutionalization 
New Orleans works with the Resilience Center to support the capacity and functions of the Resilience and Sustainability Office and the breadth and strength of its activities.
Civic rights 
At the Mexican capital, the Right to the City Charter was created, defining the obligations, responsibilities and rights of citizens upon which public policies and city management should be based
3.1.1.
3.1.2.
3.2.1. 
6 Cities that inspired the pillarr
CDMX
Da Nang
CDMX
Amman
Santiago de Chile
Amman
DOT Plan 
Amman is developing one of the most robust pillars regarding mobility: The Comprehensive Resilient Mobility System.
Cycle Lanes and Corridors 
Santiago using Pedals Plan boosts the use of bicycles as a sustainable and clean means of transportation. 
Handbook for Road Safety 
The Street Handbook is a guide for city planners on the design and construction of secure, high-performance streets to provide universal and inclusive access.
3.2.2.
3.2.3.
3.3.2.
3.3.4.
Resilience Culture and 
Communication 
The Communication Program spreads resilience culture and raises awareness and educates the community on resilience.
Resilience at the Border 
Mexico City is fostering the National Resilience Agenda with Mexican cities that are part of the 100RC network. In turn, 
Juarez seeks to spearhead the resilience movement in the border cities of northern Mexico.
3.3.1.
Santiago de Chile
Santa Fe
New Orleans
CDMX
Amman
3.3.4.
3.2.1.
3.1.1.
3.1.2.
3.2.3.
3.3.1.
3.3.2.
Da Nang
3.2.2.
Integrated Juarez Inspiration Map 
Resilient Juarez

[Page 61]
Term:
Signature
Medium
3.1
3.1.1. Prepare and Publish the Juarez Charter for the Right to the City
Status: 
Lead:
Stakeholders:
Aspirational
Resilience Office
• 
Councilors
• 
Juarez Strategic Plan
• 
Civil associations
• 
Academic Institutions
• 
HIC-Latin America + +
Preparation of the Charter
Description:
The first Charter of the Right to the City, which was born in 2005 at the UN-Habitat Cities Summit, claimed the right to the city as a human right. The document frames the top challenges in physical, economic, social, environmental, political and cultural terms. 
More than 99% of the population of Juarez lives within the city’s urban sprawl and about 40% of cannot afford a decent home. This situation requires development a document that enshrines the principles and strategic foundation of the right to the city: full exercise of human rights for all and democratic participation in the management of the city; the city’s social responsibility for its urban spaces; equality, non-discrimination, and special protection for vulnerable groups and individuals; commitment of the private sector to social equality, and solidary economy enhancement. The Resilience Office must consider the following in creating the charter:
1. 
Creation of an invitation to multi- and inter-sector subject matter experts
2. 
Creation of forums that foster the exchange of ideas and experience and to identify needs, such as the rights to housing, to access to basic services, to mobility, to transportation and to energy
3. 
Establishment of a common agenda and strategic issues
4. 
Developing a Charter of the Right to the City that addresses local conditions.
5. 
Signing of the document by local authorities, so that the Charter is accepted as the governing principle in the building of an equitable and inclusive urban environment.
The Resilience Office plans to publish and introduce the Charter by 2020.
Resilience
Qualities
CRF
Right to the City 
Cross-Cutting Axes:
Indicators/Expected Outcome
4a 4b 4c
1 2 3
The charter was the result of citizens’ aspirations for a democratic city in which human rights are duly enforced, and it was inspired by the international debate on the Right to the City.
CDMX Charter for the Right to the City 
Democratic and equitable enjoyment of the city “The development of Mexico City Charter for Civic Rights reflects a change in the city’s democratic process by unifying enforcement and exercise of human rights through a political-social pact between civil society, autonomous bodies, the government, educational entities, among others”
Emilio Álvarez de Icaza.
The Charter is an instrument that defines the different obligations and the public policy and management principles of the urban movement. The official signing of the Charter took place on 13 July 2010 and was executed by local authorities from the executive, legislative, and judicial levels of government as well as by representatives of civil society and independent public organizations.
The document proposes a series of public policy measures as well as commitments by various stakeholders, and it details not only what the majority of the population wants, but how their desires are to be fulfilled and what role each sector in society must play.
The Charter is founded on 6 strategic elements: 
Full exercise of citizenship
Social function of the city, of land and of property
Democratic management of the city 
Democratic production of the city and in the city 
Sustainable and responsible management of the natural, historic, and energy assets of the city and its surrounding areas
Photo credit: SEDEMA
Strategic action: 
Reflexive
Robust
Inclusive
Integrated
Resourceful
Redundant
Flexible
Capsule Integrated Juarez
Resilient Juarez

[Page 62]
Priority
Medium
3.1.2. Revitalize the Historic District as a Place of Social Exchange, 
Recreation and Identity
Status: 
Lead:
Stakeholders:
New
Planning and Assessment 
General Direction
• 
Urban Development General 
Direction
• 
UNESCO-Mx
• 
Resilience Office
• 
Municipal Institute for Women
• 
Research and Planning 
Municipal Institute
• 
Cultural Institute
• 
Economic Development 
General Direction
• 
Public security Direction
• 
Technical Direction + +
Declaration + +
Book published + +
Roads included in UNESCO 
Tentative List
Description:
1. The Resilience Office will consider making the designation of a “Historic District” a municipal declaration (Perimeter A). It must consider the expert knowledge regarding the unique features of city areas to set a discussion on the matter: technical reviews institutional level and forums/workshops to discuss expectations and potential outcomes. 
2. The review of the Historic District Master Plan will allow consideration of the establishment of a buffer area (perimeter B), referred to in the 1950s as the “consolidated city.”
3. The Planning and Assessment General Direction will conduct a forum (Historical evolution of border cities: What do we want to preserve and why?) with the participation of national agencies and border communities (INAH, UACJ, COLEF, UNM Albuquerque, NMSU 
Las Cruces). This forum will review examples of historic preservation in border cities and will analyze the policies they are implementing. The first result of the forum will be a publication on preservation in border cities. 
4. The Resilience Office will Promote the actions of urban conservation of the old roads within Juarez urban footprint, to propose to the Conalmex-UNESCO an extension of the declaration of the 
World Heritage of the Camino Real de Tierra Adentro (CRTA). This requires hiring a technical study (dossier) and holding meetings with representatives of the State Government. It is suggested that the city collaborates with the private consulting office that formed the first CRTA file.
5. The Resilience Office will extend an invitation to a workshop on transforming the urban image of strategic areas inside the consolidated city (possible topics: use of plots, how to balance utilities with housing, height of buildings and colors of facades, pedestrian/automobile mobility). The contract could be executed by private consultants and the Architectural Heritage Laboratory of UACJ.
CRF
Cross-Cutting Axes:
3.1
SOD:
Indicators/Expected Outcome
2c 2a 4c
1 2 3
GisArte: Painting culture together
The Municipal Government and the Municipal Cultural 
Institute and Trade Association organized this event for young artists.
Festival held 
October 21, 2017 
More than 40 madonnari artists (chalk painters) participated.
 Artists displayed their talents on the streets of the Historic District in the city’s first festival of this kind.
Families and tourists enjoyed the art festival’s buzz and the interaction with artists. 
The festival showcased local talent and brought the 
Historic District back to life.
“Art and culture are the most effective means to create, transform and develop resilient societies; they inspire dreams and create new forms that bring us together, no matter our age, sex or income level.”
Jessica Fong
Photo credit: Brenda Rodríguez
Local capsule:
Resilience
Qualities
Reflexive
Robust
Inclusive
Integrated
Resourceful
Redundant
Flexible
Capsule Integrated Juarez
Resilient Juarez

[Page 63]
Priority
3.1
3.1.3. Historic District Regulation 
Status: 
Lead:
Stakeholders:
New
Planning and Assessment 
General Direction
• 
Urban Development General 
Direction
• 
UNESCO-MX
• 
Resilience Office
• 
Municipal Institute for Women
• 
Research and Planning 
Municipal Institute
• 
Cultural Institute
• 
Economic Development 
General Direction
• 
Public Security Direction
• 
Technical Direction + +
Regulation + +
Number of stakeholders involve
Description:
Description:
The city’s Historic District is a unique, socially important urban space on Mexico’s northern border. Ciudad Juarez is making efforts to support projects in the Historic District, some of which have not been implemented due to insufficient funding. A proposed regulation for the Historic District will provide new funding options while ensuring clarity and transparency in the project approval and resource allocation processes.
The Planning and Assessment General Direction will take the following steps:
1. 
Develop the content of the regulation.
2. 
Conduct meetings and workshops with key stakeholders and 
UNESCO-MX.
3. 
Prepare a draft of the regulation.
4. 
Oversee implementation of the regulation.
Indicators / Expected Outcome
4a 2b
1 2 3
Signature
Short
3.2
3.2.1. Institutionalize the Juarez Resilience Office
New
Mayor 
Resilience Office
• 
Technical Direction
• 
Planning and Assessment 
General Direction
• 
Chief Clerk’s Office
• 
Councilors
• 
100RC + +
Edicto de creación de la oficina + +
Número de proyectos incluidos en la Cartera
Since Juarez was selected to join the 100RC Network, the Mayor and the Resilience Office have been collaborating with officials from the three levels of government and with members of local and international organizations and academic institutions to develop actions and implement projects with a resilience lens in Juarez. 
To implement any of the actions of the Resilience Strategy, the Mayor must include the Resilience Office in the municipality’s organizational structure. The 
Resilience Office will be in charge of designing the projects articulated in this document and will coordinate with all stakeholders. It will serve as the tactical guidance agency for developing resilience within the municipality, will align the city’s priorities with specific initiatives, and will determine the timing for implementation of short-, medium-, and long-term actions. The Resilience Office will create a portfolio of resilience projects to help organize initiatives originating in the city. This will help drive the creation of projects that take resilience into account and have common benefits. To accomplish all this, the Resilience Office will pursue the external funding and resources that may be needed to implement these resilience projects.
Resilient Planning 
4a 4b 4c
1 2 3
Type:
Type:
Term:
Term:
Reflexive
Reflexive
Robust
Robust
Inclusive
Inclusive
Integrated
Integrated
Resourceful
Resourceful
Redundant
Redundant
Flexible
Flexible
Resilience
Qualities
Resilience
Qualities
CRF
Cross-Cutting Axes:
SOD:
Status: 
Lead:
Stakeholders:
Indicators / Expected Outcome
CRF
Cross-Cutting Axes:
SOD:
Resilient Juarez
Integrated Juárez

[Page 64]
Supplemental
3.2
3.2.2. Resilience Culture and Communications Strategy
Aspirational
Communication 
General Coordination 
Resilience Office
• 
Private Sector Initiative
• 
Civil Associations
• 
Academic Institutions
• 
General Education Direction
• 
Social Development General 
Direction
• 
Cultural Institute of Juarez 
Municipality
• 
Media + +
Number of campaigns + +
Estimated number of people reached
Description:
To build its resilience, a city must create awareness of the importance of this new paradigm in all its inhabitants. That is why it is essential that the Social 
Communication General Direction and the Resilience Office design a communications strategy that promotes resilience across the city. To build a more resilient society, actions must be based on the local context, and citizens must be fully informed so that they can make decisions independently regarding their physical, economic, social and environmental well-being.
The Social Communication General Direction and the Resilience Office will share responsibility for the communications strategy and its implementation, as follows:
1. 
Both will develop education campaigns at various levels, including the Public Education Ministry.
2. 
The Resilience Office will drive awareness in the media, especially through social media.
3. 
Both will train decision makers and explore local marketing strategies for informing people about the Resilience Office and how projects and actions developed through a resilience lens can improve their lives.
4b 2c 3a
1 2 3
Signature
Short
3.2
3.2.3. Binational Agenda on Urban Resilience at the Northern Border
Aspirational
Resilience Office
• 
City Hall
• 
Mayors of Border 
Municipalities.
• 
Academic Institutions
• 
Civil Associations
• 
SEDATU
• 
Colegio de la Frontera Norte
• 
BDAN + +
Number of cities with strategic alliances
Description:
Mexican border cities share a common history of divided territories, proximity to U.S. cities, manufacturing-based economies, social and urban backwardness , as well as violence. As Juarez is now part of the 100RC Network, the Resilience 
Office will be able to help other border cities prepare and adapt to acute shocks and chronic stresses by sharing the knowledge of other 100RC Network members and strategic partners as well as the experience that Juarez gains. It will be able to help Tijuana, Mexicali, Nogales, Piedras Negras, Reynosa, Matamoros and Nuevo Laredo with their own resilient urban planning and development. At present, the Ministry of Rural, Territorial and City Development has recognized 
To foster a binational agenda among the cities on the northern border, the Resilience Office will: 
1. 
Identify a group of border cities interested in adopting the resilience methodology and host discussions, seminars, courses, and workshops.
2. 
Establish a collaboration agreement and a common agenda.
3. 
Make a proposal to host the Resilient Cities Border Forum at Ciudad Juarez at the Asociación de Alcaldes de la Frontera Norte (AAFN) to gather the mayors together to share information and their experiences in building resilience.
2c 4b
1 2 3
Type:
Term:
Reflexive
Robust
Inclusive
Integrated
Resourceful
Redundant
Flexible
Type:
Term:
Reflexive
Robust
Inclusive
Integrated
Resourceful
Redundant
Flexible
Resilience
Qualities
Resilience
Qualities
Status: 
Status: 
Lead:
Lead:
Stakeholders:
Stakeholders:
Indicators / Expected Outcome
Indicators / Expected Outcome
CRF
CRF
Cross-Cutting Axes:
Cross-Cutting Axes:
SOD:
SOD:
Resilient Juarez
Integrated Juárez

[Page 65]
3.3.1. Transportation-Oriented Development Plan
Aspirational
Research and Planning 
Municipal Institute
• 
Planning and Assessment 
General Direction
• 
Urban Development 
General Direction
• 
Public Works General 
Direction
• 
Resilience Office
• 
Academic Institutions + +
Presentation of document + +
Publication in Federal Official Gazette + + Progress reported at each stage
Between 2000 and 2015, urban sprawl in Juarez grew by 40%, while the population grew by barely 1%. With a density of 42 inhabitants per hectare, the unplanned development causes those who live and work in Juarez to invest more time and resources on traveling because public transportation and the road infrastructure are inadequate (Bicycle Mobility Plan, 2015). Consequently, the Research and Planning Municipal Institute has revised its development model, replacing it with a transportation-oriented development (TOD) model that will improve mobility and promote efficient, inclusive, equitable and sustainable modes of transportation (ITD, 2013). To implement this model, the Research and 
Planning Municipal Institute will:
1. 
Modify urban planning projects to make mobility one of the main principles.
2. 
Establish a requirement that urban development plans be updated with performance and monitoring metrics; appoint individuals to provide oversight and set penalties for non-compliance.
3. 
Modify housing policies to include location criteria, which must be reflected in funding and resource allocation.
4. 
The Research and Planning Municipal Institute included some of the TOD model’s guidelines in the Sustainable Urban Development Plan for Ciudad Juarez in 2016, but they barely addressed road infrastructure. This action will establish strategic guidelines for the inclusion of DOT principles in urban development and mobility proposals submitted to the city. 
CRF
Alternate Connectivity and Mobility Plan
Priority
3a 4c 3c
1 2 3
Signature
3.3
3.3.2. Bicycle Lanes and Pedestrian Corridors Project
New
Urban Development 
General Direction
• 
Planning and Assessment 
General Direction
• 
Urban Development General 
Direction
• 
Public Works General 
Direction
• 
Resilience Office
• 
Academic Institutions
• 
Research and Planning 
Municipal Institute
• 
Civil Associations
• 
Technical Direction + +
Number of intervened kilometres
Descripción:
To improve competitiveness and quality of life for the people of Juarez, the Urban 
Development General Direction must modify day-to-day travel habits to encourage the use of bicycles. Given the lack of infrastructure and dependence on private cars, the number of those traveling by bicycle is less than 1% of the population, while 28% of the population get where they need to go by walking. 
The city’s downtown bicycle project is currently being executed and a proposal for an intercampus route is being considered. The implementation of both projects is the first stage (institutional and legislative framework) of the city’s Transportation-Oriented Development Plan. This plan will promote the construction of bicycle lanes and guarantee the safety of users at various sites throughout the city.
With this action, the Urban Development General Direction is focusing on urban spaces that provide access to cyclists and pedestrians and that are connected to the mass transit network and important commuter destinations, such as workplaces, educational centers and commercial businesses. The project will improve the quality of life in the city by reducing stress and encouraging healthy exercise. It will also reduce travel costs and pollution from vehicle emissions, which will have a positive impact on the environment.
To implement this action, the Urban Development General Direction will:
1. 
Work with IMPI and suggest technical guidelines to urban designers preparing various proposals.
2. 
Foster and engage in participatory design.
3. 
Implement the various proposals. 
CRF
Medium
3a 3b
1 2 3
Type:
Term:
Reflexive
Robust
Inclusive
Integrated
Resourceful
Redundant
Flexible
Type:
Term:
Reflexive
Robust
Inclusive
Integrated
Resourceful
Redundant
Flexible
Resilience
Qualities
Resilience
Qualities
Description:
Status: 
Status: 
Lead:
Lead:
Stakeholders:
Stakeholders:
Indicators / Expected Outcome
Indicators / Expected Outcome
Cross-Cutting Axes:
Cross-Cutting Axes:
SOD:
SOD:
Resilient Juarez
Integrated Juárez

[Page 66]
Sustainable mobility: “Rides with a Purpose” and the “Recreational 
Bicycle Lane”
Urban mobility is a challenge affecting most modern cities, a fact that has encouraged the search for new transportation models and systems to meet citizens’ needs. Sustainable mobility is an increasingly popular concept because of its economic, physical and environmental benefits. 
Proposals such as “Rides with a Purpose” and the “Recreational Bicycle Lane” are designed to make a huge impact in the community through the use of bicycles as an alternative to cars and to encourage the use of bicycles in a safe manner.
“Rides with a Purpose” is an initiative of the 
Resilience Office that promotes the use of bicycles within the city, not just for recreation but for the health and well-being of everyone. 
During 2017, two rides took place.
The second one, “Rides with a 
Purpose: Comedor 
Extiende tus Alas,” was on July 28
The project was conducted from November 5 to 
December 3 at a stretch of 
Av. 16 de Septiembre between 
8:00 am and 1:00 pm.
To transform mobility in Juarez, plans, programs and public policies that encourage the use of bicycles as an alternate means of transportation must be supported.
The first one, “Night Ride 
Against Heat,” was on May 19.
Its purpose was to spread the word about the heat waves across the region Its purpose was to collect donations of food and groceries for the NGO 
Extiende tus Alas.
The Recreational Bicycle 
Lane is an initiative of the 
Municipal Government proposing to close a street in the Historic 
District every Sunday for recreational use only.
Photo credit: Diana Talavera
Graphic Information Integrated Juarez
Juárez resiliente

[Page 67]
3.3.3. Interactive Map of Alternate Travel Routes
New
Resilience Office
• 
Planning and Assessment 
General Direction
• 
Urban Development General 
Direction
• 
Public Works General Direction
• 
Resilience Office
• 
Academic institutions
• 
Research and Planning 
Municipal Institute
• 
100RC
• 
Civil Associations
• 
Technical Direction
• 
Public Security Direction + +
Interactive map developed + +
Number of campaigns developed + +
Number of downloads
Description:
Using new communication technologies, the Resilience Office will design an interactive map that brings together the experience and knowledge of bicycle riders, pedestrians and other public space users in real time in a mobile app format. The goal is to make the urban landscape easier to navigate by identifying paths, old roads, rural roads and landmarks that may improve safety and connectivity. 
In the first stage of this action, the Resilience Office will host focus groups and workshops with civic organizations experienced in mobility issues to set guidelines for creating the app. The Resilience Office will then use the results of the focus groups and workshops to develop the Bicycle Plan and identify the safest, most appropriate routes for those traveling by bicycle. In the second stage, the Resilience Office, will work with IT and systems experts to build a map in a Web format or as an application by the first quarter of 2020. 
To implement the two stages of this action, the Resilience Office will: 
1. 
Conduct focus groups and workshops.
2. 
Design the map of travel routes jointly with citizens and civic organizations.
3. 
Build an interactive map of the city.
The Resilience Office estimates to have the map developed by the first quarter of 2020.
Supplemental
Short
3a 4b 2c
1 2 3
3.3
3.3.4. Road Safety Handbook
Existing
Research and Planning 
Municipal Institute
• 
Planning and Assessment 
General Direction
• 
Urban Development General 
Direction
• 
Public Works General Direction
• 
Resilience Office
• 
Academic Institutions
• 
Civil Associations
• 
Public Security Direction + +
Publication of Handbook + +
Communication and dissemination campaign
Description:
The handbook will focus on three main stakeholders: bicyclists, pedestrians and motor vehicles drivers. The initiative seeks to improve the travel conditions for pedestrians and bicyclists, and for their trips, through an educational campaign on the best roads for each to use. .In addition, it will promote environments suitable for walking and create guidelines for secure, affordable and universal design. This action is inspired by the UN’s Global Plan for the Decade of Action for Road Safety 
2011-2020, which covers the following pillars:
1. 
Building road safety management capacity.
2. 
Improving the safety of roads and broader transportation networks.
3. 
Developing safer vehicles.
4. 
Enhancing the behavior of road users.
5. 
Improving post-crash response.. 
The Research and Planning Municipal Institute aims to execute a series of actions in two stages to ensure greater safety for all types of travel and develop a project that will be eligible for international funding to implement the stages. It will:
1. In the first stage (short term), prepare guidelines and handbooks to foster a culture of road safety among users. 
2. 
In the second stage (long term), work to ensure that municipal and state agencies adopt the pillars of the Global Plan, and, as a result, a project will be developed to enable access to international funding in order to establish each of the suggested stages.
CRF
Supplemental
Short
2c 2b 3a
1 2 3
Type:
Term:
Reflexive
Robust
Inclusive
Integrated
Resourceful
Redundant
Flexible
Type:
Term:
Reflexive
Robust
Inclusive
Integrated
Resourceful
Redundant
Flexible
Resilience
Qualities
Resilience
Qualities
Status: 
Status: 
Lead:
Lead:
Stakeholders:
Stakeholders:
Indicators / Expected Outcome
Indicators / Expected Outcome
CRF
Cross-Cutting Axes:
Cross-Cutting Axes:
SOD:
SOD:
Resilient Juarez
Integrated Juárez

[Page 68]
Juaritos literario: los circuitos de la memoria
The literary map of Ciudad Juarez is a collaborative project that tracks literary references in which our city is the star or has an important role in the poem, novel or play.
We went out to the streets after touring the pages of a long written tradition about the old Paso del Norte
The fictional roles of some spaces in the urban landscape were behind the creation of tour maps –maps of literary trails passing through various sites that have inspired local authors. 
Visitors to Juarez can take the maps and design their own walking tours of the city. 
Day-to-day life in Juarez is depicted in literature as a series of adventures, mysteries, stresses and emotions, which compels us to think about ourselves and how we live in a metropolis that is full of energy and disruptions
Some literary works focus on the violence in the city at the turn of century, and promoting these works would not change the city’s image, but highlight the sensational aspects of that period “From my field of study, literature, I think that reading works that evoke the city are the best incentive for remembering the past, making sense of grief and getting prepared to create a future in which our dreams can come true.”
However, we believe it would be a mistake to avoid remembering the difficulties the city once faced. Now we can view these events from a certain distance, as we face new challenges and work to create a future that reflects the memories and lessons of our past history. The dynamics of border cities is such that they have cycles and alternate between times of stability and times of disruption. We cannot deny what happened in the past, and turning a blind eye to it would be even worse.
The Juaritos Literario collective promotes and distributes the literary heritage of Ciudad 
Juarez (https://juaritosliterario.
com/), which is a key foundation for building a regional identity and a sense of rootedness. The connections that exist between writers, readers and critics start when a book is opened. The collectives’ literary walks bring people together in the avenues, plazas and alleys of the city. As they walk along, each walkerreader is able to rekindle images and memories from reading the book and can also enjoy sharing them with others.
Carlos Urani Montiel
Photo credits: Urani Montiel
Local capsule:
Resilient Juarez
Capsule Integrated Juarez

[Page 69]
Photo credit: Luis Pegut
Juarez
A Society that Protects the Environment and Is Prepared to Face Disasters
Goals:
Making Juarez a Model City of 
Climate Adaptation. 
Expected Outcome: Ciudad Juarez will adopt an environmental plan reflecting its location and resource issues and informed by citizen participation. This plan will become the basis of a climate action plan with specific mitigation and adaptation goals as well as a commitment to reducing carbon emissions.. 
Environmental Education for Citizens and the Private Sector.
 
Expected Outcome: Ciudad Juarez will include comprehensive education on environmental issues in school curricula and entrepreneurial action proposals, with the goal of becoming a city that is climate neutral.
Comprehensive Water Management.
 
Expected Outcome: Ciudad Juarez will see a considerable reduction in the floods that disrupt traffic flow thanks to the new investments in green infrastructure, which captures rainfall water and thus reduces water consumption and fosters water sustainability.
4.1.
4.2.
4.3.
Resilient Juarez

[Page 70]
SST Juarez
Soil Surface Temperature (SST) in 2010:
High: 57.4 °C
Low: 6.8 °C SST El Paso
High: 59.2 °C
Low: 28.7 °C
Rio Grande
Main roads
Context
Adapted Juarez
As a desert ecosystem (dry and arid), the northern region of Mexico endures extreme weather with documented maximum temperatures of up to 45°C and minimum temperatures of -15°C. The heat waves in the region are now more frequent and last longer every year, increasing the number of deaths per year and negatively impacting energy and natural resources. 
The availability of water from the Rio Grande, which is primarily controlled by the Federal Government, is a critical challenge in the region, as the water is almost entirely restricted to irrigation and agricultural use.. 
The other sources of potable water for Juarez are the Bolson del Hueco and Bolson de la Mesilla aquifers. These underground water bodies provide drinking water for both cities, and regulation and extraction are controlled at the federal level. 
The challenge lies in the fact that the optimum rate of consumption has already reached an alarming level and in the coming years, the supply of water will be reduced. 
The region’s sporadic rainstorms, which cause temporary accumulations of rainfall in Juarez due to its topographic conditions and infrastructure configuration, are another challenge. They damage the city’s infrastructure, disrupt the transit system, and cause public health problems. 
Lastly, pollution levels in the city are increasing due to emissions from cars, trucks, buses and maquiladoras. Border bridges are one of the main sources of pollution, given the large concentration of cars waiting to cross into the neighboring country.
The goals of this pillar are to make the most of the potential advantages of living in a desert area, use the region’s resources in moderation, and help the city preserve its resources for the future and better manage its non-renewable resources. 
The goals focus on the need to create awareness about the effects of climate change, such as water supply shortages, heat waves, and floods, and they incorporate resilience as the underlying principle for transformational change.
Map Source: “Urban Growth Effects on the Paso del 
Norte Region Climate System 1975-2010.” José Luis 
Sandoval Granados (2010), International SeminarWorkshop of the Mexican Cities to Sustainability 
Network. Guanajuato, Mexico.
Resilient Juarez
Context Adapted Juarez

[Page 71]
Santiago de Chile
New Orleans
Berkeley
Amman
4.2.1.1.
4.1.2.
4.3.2.
4.3.1.
4.2.1.
4.1.1.
 Thessaloniki
Bangkok
4.2.2.
Adapted Juarez 
Inspiration Map
Santiago de Chile New Orleans
Municipal Strategy on Climate Adaptation 
Recognizing that the effects of climate change will continue to impact the quality of life of its citizens, New Orleans is working on the design and implementation of a Climate Action Plan.
Environmental Agenda 
Inspired by the Regional Program for Climate 
Change, Santiago de Chile is including the topic in regional public policy and finding points of convergence with the National Agenda and regional development strategies.
4.1.1
4.1.2
Thessaloniki
Bangkok
Environmental Education and Culture
Thessaloniki is conducting environmental campaigns through traditional and digital media, which target citizens and are conducted jointly with schools. The goal is to raise environmental awareness and develop innovative ideas for protecting the environment, which will improve the quality of life for all the citizens of the city.
4.2.1
4.2.1.1 Green Infrastructure
Berkeley has included green infrastructure in projects to enhance its road systems.
4.2.2
4.3.1
Urban Orchards
Bangkok is working to become a model of urban agriculture and is promoting permaculture and a participatory approach. 
Floods
To face the recurring challenge of floods, Amman has developed a Rainfall 
Water Capture Plan to better manage the use of its water resources.
4.3.2
Amman
Berkeley
6 Cities that inspired the pillarr
Resilient Juarez
Adapted Juarez Inspiration Map

[Page 72]
Priority
4.1
4.1.1. Ciudad Juarez Environmental Agenda
New
Resilience Office 
Ecology Direction
• 
Juarez Strategic Plan
• 
Juarez Limpio
• 
Juarez Academic 
Institutions
• 
El Paso Academic 
Institutions
• 
Civil Associations
• 
Industrial Associations + +
Agenda published + +
Initiatives started
The environmental agenda is a planning instrument that includes actions intended to establish strategic guidelines for implementing programs, projects and initiatives with a sustainable vision. 
During Phase I, the Resilience Office analysed city assets, discovered the lack of a published diagnosis or assessment for the municipality, and identified environmental policy as an area that should be developed. 
The Resilience Office, in collaboration with the Ecology Direction and stakeholders identified as key actors, will:: 
1. 
Conduct an assessment for the period from 2000 to 2016 of the judicial framework; municipal operations structure; international, national and state policies; key stakeholders; and budget allocated.
2. 
Conduct multi-sector workshops to exchange ideas for actions and to include initiatives developed by each stakeholder.
3. 
Prepare a document that will include all the actions identified for implementation.. 
In the last half of 2018 the Resilience Office and the Ecology Direction will publish an agenda that includes the actions that are the priority for a 6-year period.
Making Juarez a Model City of Climate Adaptation 
4c 3c 1c
1 2 3
Signature
Short
4.1
4.1.2. Municipal Climate Adaptation Strategy
Aspirational
Resilience Office
• 
Ecology Direction
• 
Academic Institutions
• 
UTEP
• 
Colegio de la Frontera Norte
• 
Texas Commission on 
Environmental Quality
• 
Civil Associations
• 
SEMARNAT
• 
National Institute of Ecology and Climate Change + +
Plan published
The Municipal Strategy on Climate Adaptation is a document governing the actions for mitigating the vulnerability of the inhabitants of Juarez, as well as the fauna and flora in it semi-desert ecosystem, to climate effects. This strategy will integrate, coordinate and promote public actions to reduce the environmental, social and economic risks in Juarez from climate conditions through a municipal initiative that defines the mitigation strategies to be followed. It will include adaptation measures and communication and education actions. The Resilience Office will collaborate with the offices of Ecology and the Environment and Health and Planning; with the three levels of authority within the Federal Government; as well as with international entities, the academic sector, and civil associations.. 
To meet the strategy’s three important milestones, the Resilience Office will::
1. 
Conduct a carbon emissions inventory for Juarez.
2. 
Foster the exchange of knowledge and experience.
3. 
Design the actions with the help of experts, prepare the document, and publish the Municipal Strategy on Climate Adaptation
The Resilience Office will submit the strategy document in the first half of 2019..
CRF
4b 3c 1c
1 2 3
Resilience
Qualities
Resilience
Qualities
Reflexive
Reflexive
Robust
Robust
Inclusive
Inclusive
Integrated
Integrated
Resourceful
Resourceful
Redundant
Redundant
Flexible
Flexible
SDO:
SDO:
Type:
Type:
Term:
Term:
Status: 
Status: 
Lead:
Lead:
Stakeholders:
Stakeholders:
Description:
Description:
CRF
Cross-Cutting Axes:
Cross-Cutting Axes:
Indicators/Expected Outcome
Indicators/Expected Outcome
Resilient Juarez
Adapted Juárez

[Page 73]
Effects of Urban Growth on the Paso del Norte 
Region’s Climate System
Dr. José Luis Sandoval Granados
The doctoral dissertation Effects of Urban Growth on the Paso del Norte Region Climate System by Dr. Jose Luis Sandoval 
Granados, which he began in 2010 and completed in 2014, assessed the effects of urban growth on the climate system based on the relationship between occupation patterns and the behavior of the soil surface temperature (SST), which determined its environmental feasibility. It set forth the following objectives
Identify and classify by remote identification methods the growth and urban occupation process in the Paso del Norte region for the period from 2000 to 2010.
Assess the SST changes with regards to urban occupation patterns in the Paso del Norte region.
Assess the environmental impact of the various urban occupation patterns with regards to the SST changes.
The process was based on four approaches: 1) relationship between society and nature, 2) geographic, 3) systemic, and 4) urban occupation. The methodology was to develop and create a series of maps and models from which conclusions can be reached regarding climate effects on urban growth, on the increase in SST, and on soil and its relationship to the regional environment.
In identifying and classifying the growth and urban occupation process in the Paso del Norte, data showed that in 2010 the U.S. already had an area of 
24,272 ha and Mexico only 12,979 ha; while by 2010 the U.S. had 36,202 ha and Mexico, barely 19,164 ha. With that, a greater influence from the U.S. end can be observed regarding the urban growth phenomenon impact on the region due to land use extension, in terms of urban constructed area cover distance.
Lastly, the 30 geo-reference points shown in the Soil Surface Temperature Model (MTSS) for Ciudad Juarez revealed an increase in the SST average of these points, ranging from 33.5°C in year 2000 to 45.2°C by 2010, with a difference of 11.7°C. The maximum temperature registered was 
37.2°C in 2000,* and in 2010 the maximum temperature over this same point was 49.7°C, which is a difference of 12.5°C above the MCUC.
SST records for El Paso, Texas, on the other hand, show a count of 30 points, out of the total 100 for the whole Paso del Norte region, where the maximum temperature was 50.51°C and the minimum, 36.8°C, with an average temperature of 
45.7°C and an increase between 2000 and 2010 of 11°C. In the SST assessment of the same 30 points for Las Cruces, New Mexico, the maximum temperature was 
51.6°C and the minimum was 28.3°C, with an average temperature of 39.9°C and a difference of 10°C between one year and the next.
The above results show that SST is increasing due to changes in the natural state of the soil and the effects of accelerated urban growth. Maps also now show very accurately the potential risk zones due to the SST increase, which affects not only the comfort levels in buildings, but results in increased energy consumption and higher risks to human health during heat waves.
 From a resilience perspective, it is important for 
Juarez to have “heat wave” prevention programs and strategic tree planting programs that mitigate the heat islands.
“Sustainable design and resilience are not a trend, or a method, or a project...they are a philosophy of life”
Local Capsule:
Resilient Juarez
Capsule Adapted Juarez

[Page 74]
Supplemental
4.2
4.2.1. Municipal Strategy for Environmental Education
Aspirational
Ecology Direction
• 
Resilience Office
• 
General Civil Protection 
Direction
• 
Social Development General 
Direction
• 
Academic Institutions
• 
Civil Associations
• 
SEMARNAT
• 
Colegio de la Frontera Norte + +
Environmental strategy published + +
Number of educational campaigns implemented
The primary goal of the Environmental Education Strategy is to educate the people of Juarez to take responsibility for the natural and social environment in which they conduct their day-to-day lives. Following the Environmental Non-Formal Education Guide (SEMARNAT, 2009), the strategy will seek to foster actions that will transform people’s habits and attitudes, and provide incentives for everyone to be accountable for their environment. 
For the strategy’s construction, in 2018 the Ecology Direction will:. 
1. 
Prepare an environmental culture assessment.
2. 
Develop policies, programs and national and/or international agreements, and develop its capacity.
3. 
Determine the scope and structure of the program that will feed the strategy.
4. 
Identify resources for implementing the strategy.. 
To launch this project, the Ecology Direction will work closely with SEMARNAT’s Education and Training Center for Sustainable Development, which has experience in implementing this type of strategy in Mexican cities. The Ecology Direction will also consult with national, state and municipal experts on environmental and education issues, and will publish the Environmental Education Strategy in the first half of 2019. 
CRF
Environmental Education and Culture for Citizens and the Private Sector 
4c 3c 2c
1 2 3
4.2.1.1 Annual Program 10 Days, 10 Actions
Status: 
Lead:
Stakeholders:
Indicators:
New
Resilience Office
• 
El Paso Resilience Office
• 
Las Cruces Sustainability Office
• 
Ecology Direction
• 
General Civil Protection 
Direction
• 
Social Development General 
Direction
• 
Community Centers General 
Direction
• 
Education Direction
• 
Joint Advisory Board
• 
EPA
• 
UTEP
• 
Colegio de la Frontera Norte
• 
Texas Commission on 
Environmental Quality
• 
Civil Associations
• 
SEMARNAT
• 
BDAN + +
Number of events + +
Number of attendees
Description:
Through this annual program, the Resilience Office aims to build climate change awareness among the population of Juarez for 10 days through 10 activities related to the topic of adapting to the impacts of climate change, mainly heat waves, frosts, droughts and floods. The Resilience Office will conduct ludic activities, discussions, and workshops to foster a culture in which citizens are better prepared to face and protect themselves from the adverse climate effects of this semi-desert ecosystem. 
In recent years the people of Juarez have suffered from a variety of extreme climate events, and so they must learn how to react and protect themselves when these events occur. In 2011 snow affected 80,000 inhabitants; in 2016, the highest temperature of the last 43 years was recorded, which increased drought conditions; in 
2017 more than 100 floods occurred, affecting roads and homes in high-risk areas. 
The Resilience Office initially developed this action by implementing a pilot project on climate change in May 2017. The goal was to have three cities in the 
Paso del Norte region participate: Ciudad Juarez, El Paso and Las Cruces. The pilot project involved all the government agencies of these municipalities. In future years the Resilience Office will sponsor two campaigns: one regarding climate adaption actions for the summer and the other, actions for the winter
Cross-Cutting Axes:
CRF
Complementaria
Corto
Photo credit: Yvone Vidaña
Resilience
Qualities
Reflexive
Robust
Inclusive
Integrated
Resourceful
Redundant
Flexible
Type:
Term:
Resilience
Qualities
Reflexive
Integrated
Resourceful
Redundant
Flexible
Type:
Term:
SDO:
Status: 
Lead:
Stakeholders:
Description:
Cross-Cutting Axes:
Indicators/Expected Outcome
Resilient Juarez
Adapted Juárez

[Page 75]
Annual Program 
10 Days 10 Actions
Strategic action: 
The Project Framework for Extreme Heat Adaptation and Mitigation in the Paso del Norte Region, which is part of a pilot project of the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).This project involves the creation of a comprehensive information system on heat and health in the Paso del Norte region (Ciudad Juarez, El Paso and Las Cruces). Under a regional cooperation agreement, the project’s goal is to create tools to reduce the threat of diseases, loss of productivity, and death from heat waves
The Annual Program 10 Days 10 Actions was an educational campaign that took place for 10 days in May 
2017. During this campaign, 10 actions on various topics were conducted to create awareness of heat waves and to prevent their impacts.
The activities included distribution of printed materials, mass bicycle events for families and grade school students, and bicycle conferences with participants from 
Mexico, the U.S. and Canada.
Now, the annual program seeks to extend the range of climate change topics beyond heat waves to climate adaptation in general.
“Resilience, in relation to Ciudad Juarez brings to my mind post-traumatic stress. According to Calhoun and Tedeschi (1999), resilience is the result of an individual’s post-traumatic growth, which is a process that helps us appreciate what is positive in life and our environment. It can change the trajectory of our lives.”
Eugenia Posada 
Research Program 
Coordinator, Texas 
Commission for Environmental 
Quality (TCEQ).
About 100 people attended the event on May 24, 2017, and it was also broadcast simultaneously for 
5 hours in El Paso, 
Texas, and Las Cruces, 
New Mexico. (9:00 am to 1:00 pm).
Tri-national conference on 
Health and Heat: Prevention, 
Mitigation and Resilience in the Paso del Norte region
An event conducted in collaboration with Juarez City 
Hall, the Border Environmental 
Education Group 2020, the Texas 
Commission on Environmental 
Quality, Technology Hub, 
Ciudad Juarez Autonomous 
University, University of Texas at El Paso and the Research and 
Planning Municipal Institute.
“At the border, cultures converge and development is fluid and ongoing; acceptation and collaboration shape special aspects of resilience: border resilience. This border resilience will underpin the creation of strategies based on equality and the need to be prepared, balancing the responsibilities of individuals and institutions, and ensuring the health and sustainability of communities and the environment in the Paso del Norte region”.
Patricia M. Juárez-Carrillo
Coordinator - Researcher
Center of Latin American and Border Studies (CLBS), University of Texas at El Paso
The event analyzed the regional climate, identifying challenges and strategies that could lead to health risk prevention, mitigation and resilience in the face of extreme heat in the 
Paso del Norte region.
The goal of the conference, which featured speakers from 
Mexico, the U.S. and 
Canada, was to present both a local and regional perspective on the challenges that result from heat waves, what has been done, and the opportunities to reduce energy losses and deaths in the region.
Photo credit: Diana Talavera
Resilient Juarez
Graphic Information Adapted Juarez

[Page 76]
4.2.2. “Urban Orchards” Project
New
Resilience Office
• 
Municipal Institute for Women
• 
Civil Associations
• 
Rural Development Direction
• 
Private Sector Initiative
• 
Academic Institutions + +
Number of participants + +
Number of orchards installed + +
M2 of planted area
With the “Urban Orchards” project, the Resilience Office intends to promote an environmental culture by educating citizens on the importance of food production, rainfall water conservation, and organic waste management. Urban agriculture can transform bare desert spaces into green, agricultural areas producing edible organic products and providing some families with food and an additional source of income. Urban agriculture can also reduce heat islands. The project will be developed in four phases, and the Resilience Office will:
1. 
Identify edible species suitable for planting in this region (second half of 2018).
2. 
Prepare orchard prototypes (vertical, horizontal and diagonal) and irrigation (drip, spray, rainfall water harvesting) (second half of 2018).
3. 
Implement a pilot project that includes resilient parks, schools and public buildings (second half of 2018).
4. 
Create local guidelines for establishing and maintaining an orchard (year 2019). 
To execute this project, the Resilience Office must bring in subject matter experts from academic institutions and civil associations. In addition, to assist the Resilience Office with the pilot project, the Federal Government’s Ministry of Agrarian, 
Territorial and City Development (SEDATU) has methodologies and guidelines.
CRF
Environmental Education and Culture for Citizens and the Private Sector 
Priority
3b 2a 1a 1b
1 2 3
Medium
4.3
4.3.1. Innovative Project Portfolios to Assist in Floods
Existing
Resilience Office
• 
Urban Development General 
Direction
• 
Public Works General 
Direction
• 
General Civil Protection 
Direction
• 
Research and Planning 
Municipal Institute
• 
Municipal Board of Water and 
Sanitation
• 
Ciudad Juarez Autonomous 
University
• 
Colegio de la Frontera Norte
• 
CONAGUA + +
Document published + +
Number of zones enhanced 
The Resilience Office will create a portfolio of projects with a high rate of effectiveness and a high cost-benefit for the implementation of initiatives to resolve the flooding caused by rainfall in Ciudad Juarez. The lack of proper rainfall infrastructure contributes to flooding in various areas of the city, and the current rainfall drainage system requires extensive enhancements. The following issues need to be addressed::
a. 
Laws and regulations for development b. 
Long-term planning c. 
Existing facilities and their capacities d. 
Projects’ specifications and maintenance.
The Resilience Office will:
1. 
Invite water experts in the Paso del Norte region in the development of the project to assess the initiatives submitted to municipal, state and federal agencies for implementation.
2. 
Present the outcome of this project by late 2018 in a document with a general overview of the challenge and specific solutions that could be implemented in flood areas. 
3. 
Obtain funding to implement the proposals
CRF
Comprehensive Management of Water
Priority
3b 3c 1a
1 2 3
Resilience
Qualities
Reflexive
Robust
Inclusive
Integrated
Resourceful
Redundant
Flexible
Type:
Term:
Resilience
Qualities
Reflexive
Robust
Inclusive
Integrated
Resourceful
Redundant
Flexible
Type:
Term:
SDO:
Status: 
Lead:
Stakeholders:
Description:
Cross-Cutting Axes:
Indicators/Expected Outcome
SDO:
Status: 
Lead:
Stakeholders:
Description:
Cross-Cutting Axes:
Indicators/Expected Outcome
Resilient Juarez
Adapted Juárez

[Page 77]
Orchards
The urban agriculture project of the Centro de 
Asesoría y Promoción Juvenil A. C. (CASA) has been promoting environmental education since 
2015 by providing workshops on design and garden maintenance, permaculture, home-made biofilters, and the social economy. The project also offers workshops on the design and construction of an urban orchard; organic waste management; 
In 2017 143 workshops took place in various districts with groups in the most vulnerable areas, as well as with students in grade schools, secondary schools, and universities.
soil enrichment; planting, transplanting, and harvesting of different vegetables (e.g., chard, cilantro, horseradish, squash); biofertilizers; integrated pest management; and low-tech greenhouses. In addition, the project contributes to the recovery of public spaces by participating in the reforestation of parks and planting of empty lots.
have been distributed to the community
450 families have been directly benefited and now have organic orchards protected by shade houses and micro-tunnels at their homes.
More than 
5,000 plants — pomegranate, quince, peach, red and white plum, apricot, pear, apple and nectarine — have been distributed.
1,150 fruit trees 
Technical assistance is given to a family until their orchard is self-sustaining and providing them a stable benefit because they are able to sell what they grow or save money by growing their own supply of healthy food. 
Centro de Bachillerato Tecnológico Agustín Pro has been part of the distribution of vegetables and fruits in some districts in the northwest section of Ciudad Juarez.
Thanks to the links with high schools, the achievements above were possible because other groups replicated the workshops in the community for faculty and students. For example, in its urban orchard, TeleBachillerato Victor Hugo Rascon Banda gave 
25 workshops and 3 training courses on creating orchards in schools. 
When the project began, foreign foundations, such as Misereor and Paso del Norte Health 
Foundation, made donations for the purchase of organic seeds, topsoil, and fertilizer from worm castings. 
Photo credit: Casa Promoción Juvenil
Local capsule:
Capsule Adapted Juarez
Resilient Juarez

[Page 78]
4.3.2. Green Infrastructure in Public Spaces
New
Resilience Office
• 
Urban Development General 
Direction
• 
Public Works General Direction
• 
Planning and Assessment 
General Direction
• 
Research and Planning Municipal 
Institute
• 
Municipal Board of Water and 
Sanitation
• 
Ciudad Juarez Autonomous 
University
• 
CONAGUA
• 
BDAN + +
Publication of the outcome of the pilot project + +
Number of spaces renovated with GI 
The inclusion of green infrastructure (GI) elements in public spaces has been successful in semi-desert and desert regions of Northern Mexico and the southern United 
States. Green infrastructure, which is multi-functional infrastructure that uses natural systems to improve environmental quality and provide social, economic, cultural and environmental services, is a component of a sustainable water use and management system (BDAN, 2017). Through a study of local spaces, the Resilience Office has identified potential sites where projects with GI systems could be implemented and deliver benefits in the long term.. 
In 2017, the Resilience Office, in response to the “Programa 2020” invitation, requested funding from BDAN to implement a pilot project to demonstrate the effectiveness of 
GI at a local level. This project proposes to educate public officials, urban planners, civil associations, and interested parties on the design of urban spaces that use GI elements and on the implementation of a prototype in an area with floods and vegetative cover erosion issues. BDAN will include the pilot project as an attachment in its Green Infrastructure Design Guidelines Handbook.. 
For the project, the Resilience Office will:
1. 
Consult with experts on GI, rainfall water, and the hydrological basins of Ciudad Juarez and El Paso.
2. 
Present the outcome of the project during the first half of 2018.
3. 
Encourage proposals for new initiatives addressing local construction regulations and public policy at a local level.
CRF
Prioritaria
3c 2c 1b
1 2 3
Strategic Action: 
Paso del Norte Region Green 
Infrastructure Project: Workshop and Guides
In 2018, the North American Development Bank granted funds to the Technical 
Direction and Resilience Office of Juarez to implement a pilot project demonstrating the effectiveness of green infrastructure at a local level.
The extreme weather in the Paso del Norte region causes intense heat waves in the summer and freezing temperatures in the winter. These extremes result in storms and excessive rainfall. In 2006, the weather resulted in outbreaks of disease and four deaths as well as an estimated US$15 million in damages to private property and city infrastructure, including the city’s pipes, sewage system, and streets. 
The inadequate rainfall sewage system, the lack of water-resistant areas in the streets and public spaces to keep water from filtering into the subsoil, and the floods that often occur in low areas impair the city’s ability to function. To mitigate the impacts of floods, GI, which is a multifunctional type of infrastructure that uses natural systems to improve environmental quality and provide social, economic, cultural and benefits. can be used. 
Strategic stakeholders will be invited to a GI workshop for training and to exchange best practices. The city will design a GI pilot project and will contribute an appendix on GI for the 
Paso del Norte region to the North American Development Bank’s (BDAN) Green Infrastructure Design Guidelines Handbook for 
Mexican Border Municipalities.
The overarching goal is to build a binational understanding of urban runoff management, rainfall water catchment systems, and the creation of sustainable green spaces as strategies to increase the region’s resilience.
El objetivo general es fortalecer una cultura binacional sobre la importancia del manejo de las escorrentías urbanas, la captura de agua de lluvia y la creación de espacios verdes sustentables como estrategias para incrementar la resiliencia de la región. 
The project will begin in April of 
2018 and will last about 6 months.
Photo credit: Arath Rojas
Local Capsule:
Resilience
Qualities
Reflexive
Robust
Inclusive
Integrated
Resourceful
Redundant
Flexible
Type:
Term:
SDO:
Status: 
Lead:
Stakeholders:
Description:
Cross-Cutting Axes:
Indicators/Expected Outcome
Capsule Adapted Juarez
Resilient Juarez

[Page 79]
Photo credit: Arath Rojas
Next Steps
05 Next Steps
Once it is published, the Juarez Resilience Strategy is expected to become the cornerstone of long-term planning. 
To achieve successful, effective results, the principle of resilience will be the lens through which projects are selected, resources identified, and scopes of work defined. The initiative will assign priority to actions that have a greater scope, and every action must have a project manager who is responsible for its implementation. The Strategy will be the umbrella for a portfolio of projects, in which any one action may relate to other projects.
Collaboration must occur throughout the various levels of government. The Chief Resilience Officer will have a central role and work with the city mayor. Local and state government institutions have two missions: 1) to include resilience principles in their decision-making processes; and 2) to serve as the leads for some of the actions described in this document as well as to collaborate on other actions. To enhance communication among the interested parties, a matrix identifying the various projects to be developed and stakeholder interest in participating in them will be prepared.
 
The Strategy was built on learnings as, notwithstanding the social crisis in which Juarez society has been involved, many people invested time, knowledge and experience in the construction of a shared view to build a stronger resilience in the city. Therefore, inter and multi sector networks must be stronger and more robust, so that every project takes off from a solid base of stakeholders which, in turn, monitor progress. In the view of resilience, involvement and commitment of citizens ensure that projects have a greater repercussion and resonance, in addition to continuity.
A monitoring system is a key element of the Strategy, and periodic assessments will gauge the progress made on its implementation. Every action has indicators for measuring the progress achieved. The periodic assessments will identify gaps and opportunities for exploring new solutions. The monitoring system will also help determine how effective the various initiatives are in building resilience in Juarez. 
For a successful implementation of the Resilience Strategy, the Resilience 
Office must be firmly established. In addition to building resilience in Juarez, it will lead the resilience movement along Mexico’s northern border. Other agencies must be engaged to help monitor the actions, consolidate methodologies, and find funding sources to support the execution of projects that result from the actions.
Prepare projects per action. There are five project management processes, which have clear dependencies and are executed in the same sequence. The subcomponents of one process may interact with the components of the other four processes. The five processes are:
 Defines the objectives and intended scope of the project, and documents the required course of action to achieve the objectives.
Planning Includes the people and resources to execute the plan or manage the project.
Execution Signifies that the phase has ended, based on official acceptance of the product, service or outcome. 
Delivery Measures progress regularly to identify gaps in the project management plan so that corrective measures may be taken to meet project objectives.
Monitoring and Control
Begins the official implementation of a product, service or outcome.
Start
Resilient Juarez
Resilient Juarez

[Page 80]
Collaborators and recognitions 
Photo credit: Luis Pegut
06 Collaborators and 
Acknowledgments
Verónica González Sepúlveda 
Chief Resilience Officer
In the process of developing the Resilience Strategy, stakeholders were included who were critical to each of the projects supported by the Resilience Office since 2016.These acknowledgments cover a period from project inception to the publication of this document. I am grateful to all the stakeholders involved in executing this Strategy and making it stronger and more successful every day through their participation. 
I want to extend my deepest appreciation to every person who is passionately committed to this initiative and working to improve Ciudad Juarez, our city. Thank you to all the following for your valuable contributions to building the foundations of this Strategy and for your participation on the first Resilience Board of Directors:
+ +
Javier Chávez + +
José Luis Escanero + +
Jessica Hernández + +
Manuel Herrera + +
Vicente López + +
Sergio Meza + +
Lydia Nesbitt + +
Carlos Rincón + +
Lourdes Romo + +
Manuel Sotelo + +
Gerardo Tarín + +
Rodolfo Vázquez + +
Lilia Ana Méndez Rentería + +
Gilberto Contreras I wish to particularly thank Alejandro Loaeza, Erick Sanchez, Ricardo Mora, Patricia 
Juarez-Castillo, Veronica Corchado, Rosa Isela Sanchez, Elvira Maycotte, Maria Cisneros, 
Eugenia Posada, and Joaquin Marrufo of the Research and Planning Municipal Institute for their support of every initiative and for believing in every action. 
A To each person listed below, I am grateful for your commitment to supporting the resilience movement in Juarez. All of us who love this place will continue planning and working together for the well-being of every inhabitant of Juarez. 
Sincerely, 
Resilient Juarez
Resilient Juarez

[Page 81]
Collaborators and recognitions 
Municipal Government
Chief Clerk’s Office 
Víctor Ortega
Technical Direction 
Alejandro Loaeza
Gabriel Muñoz
Gabriel Siller
Planning and Assessment General Direction
Juan Enrique Diaz
José Gómez Banda
Social Communication General Coordination
Mónica Luévano
Guadalupe Félix
Special Events coordination
Leticia Espir
General Direction of Public Services
Raúl Rodríguez Santillanes
Ismael Santillán
Parks and Gardens Direction
Edmundo Urrutia
Public Works General Direction
Gerardo Silva Márquez
Economic Development General Direction
Humberto Álvarez Quevedo
Agustín Pimentel 
Abel Ayala
General Civil Protection Direction
Efrén Matamoros Barraza
General Health Direction 
Francisco Ramírez Montañez
Ecology Direction
Flor Karina Cuevas Vásquez
Education Direction 
Jesús Ortega Aguirre
Municipal Institute for Women
Verónica Corchado
Sandra Ramírez
Brisa Maltos
Sports and Culture Municipal Institute
Juan Pedro Plascencia
Verónica Frías
Cultural Institute of Juarez Municipality
Miguel Ángel Mendoza
Jessica Fong
Desarrollo Integral de la Familia
Alejandra Cabada
Research and Planning Municipal Institute
Roberto Mora
Alfredo Morales
Alfonso Herrera
Rubén Salcido
Patricia Matamoros
Juarez Youth Institute
Jesús Carlos Andreu
Municipal Public security Direction
Esteban Martínez
Austin Quezada
Historic District Social and Human 
Development Commission
Graciela Espejo Alvídrez
Museo de la Revolución en la Frontera MUREF
Alejandra Delgado
Councillors
Ubaldo Solís
Jaqueline Armendariz
State Government
Ministry of Urban Development and Ecology (SEDUE)
Salvador Barragán
Municipal Board of Water and Sanitation
Manuel Herrera
Humberto Uranga
Raúl Luévano
Fideicomiso para la Competitividad y Seguridad 
Ciudadana FICOSEC 
Marco Gutiérrez
Isaac González
Academic Institutions
Ciudad Juarez Autonomous University 
Erick Sánchez
Javier Chávez
Elvira Maycotte
Salvador Salazar
Vladimir Hernández
Sara Morales 
José Luis Sandoval
Urani Montiel
Ernestor Esparza
Adrián Vázquez
Vaneza Chávez Cano
Gilberto Velázquez
Laura Ochoa
Gabriel García
Marisol Sosa
Frida Nemeth
René Saucedo
Alma Rodríguez
Ricardo Juárez
Isaac Leobardo Sánchez
Francisco Llera
Salvador Valdovinos
Alejandro González Milea
Colegio de la Frontera Norte 
Lourdes Romo
César Fuentes
Ana Córdova
Tecnológico de Monterrey
Carlos Scheel
Carlos Irigoyen
TecMilenio
Rosa Isela Sánchez
Olga Mantilla
Alina Marrufo
Sofía Chávez
Marlene Escanero
University of Texas at El Paso
Diana Natalicio
William Hardgrove
José Luis Pérez
Patricia Juárez Carrillo
Instituto Hunt
Patrick Schaeffer
El Paso Community College
Sara Rodríguez
INTERNATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
Environmental Protection Agency 
Carlos Rincón
María Sisneros
Texas Commission on Environmental Quality 
Eugenia Posada
North America Development Bank
Jessica Hernández
Joaquín Marrufo United States Consulate
Molly P. Flores
Patricia R. Morales
Juan Pablo Santana
Alejandro Meléndez
Masterpeace México
Sofie de Wulf
David Rincón
UNO DC
Claudio La Camera
Alejandra Gómez
Giovanna Martínez
Rebuild By Design
Amy Chester
Idan Sasson
Gehl Institute
Jennifer Gardner
CIVIL ASSOCIATIONS 
Plan Estratégico de Juárez
Sergio Meza de Anda
Claudia Luz Arreola
Technology Hub
Ricardo Mora
Rudy Vázquez
Luis Pegut
Paso del Norte Foundation for Health and Well-Being
Karen Yarza
Jesús Valenzuela
Luis Mendoza
Health and Community Development of Ciudad Juarez 
FEMAP
José Luis Escanero
Red Tira Paro
Omar Bolado
Centro de Asesoría y Promoción Juvenil AC CASA
Maria Luisa Villalobos
Ismael Ontiveros
Colectiva: Arte, comunidad y equidad
Tania Melanie Reyes
Other
Jenny Hernandez
Sarah Dillabough
Victor Moreno
Jesús Robledo
Olivia Armenta
Resilient Juarez

[Page 82]
Appendix
07 Appendix
7.1 Indicators Table 
Goal 1.1
Recover urban public and vacant spaces that can foster positive social interaction.
1.1.1 To Foster and Drive the Creation of Resilient Parks
Medium
Medium
Short
Short
Long
1.1.2 Annual Contest “Let us enhance a public space.” 1.1.3 Design and Implement the Program “Adoption of Public Spaces”.
1.1.4 Art and Cultural Workshops for 
Children and Young People at the Public Space Program
1.1.5 Vacant Land Recovery Program
Action
Term
Inclusive 
Juarez
Number of recovered parks
Population benefited
Planning and Assessment 
General Direction
Resilience Office
Planning and Assessment 
General Direction
Economic Development 
General Direction
Resilience Office
Cultural Institute of 
Juarez Municipality
Urban Development 
General Direction
5.2.4. Green spaces
1.1.2. Citizen involvement
5.3. . Ecology and sustainable development
4.3.3. Culture and education for everyone
3.2. Family integration, social cohesion and development
5.1.1. . Human settlements and urban development
3, 11, 13, 15
9, 11, 13
9, 11
3, 4, 16
11, 15
Number of spaces recovered 
Recovered area in m2
Incentives granted
Recovered area in m2
Number of workshops conducted Number of students trained Number of participant schools
Recovered area in m2
Indicators:
/ Expected Outcomes
Lead
SDO
PDM 2016 - 2018
Resilient Juarez
Resilient Juarez

[Page 83]
Appendix
Goal 1.2
Improve safety and security for women
Goa 2.1
Make Juarez a model of innovation and competitiveness
1.2.1 Technology applications on safety and prevention for citizens
2.1.1 Economic competitiveness indicators system
1.2.2 Community leadership program
2.1.2 Innovation and technology workshops for children and young peoples
1.2.3 Safe Corridor for women
2.1.2.1 Support Fund for 
Innovative and Creative 
Talents (FATIC)
1.2.4 International Safety and Social 
Inclusion Network (ISSIN)
2.1.3 Workshops for economic and social empowerment of women in 
Ciudad Juarez
Action
Term
Medium
Medium
Medium
Medium
Short
Short
Short
Short
Inclusive 
Juarez
Juárez 
Próspera
Indicators:
/ Expected Outcomes
Lead
SDO
PDM 2016 - 2018
Number of apps developed
Number of downloads
Implementation of the indicators system
Annual publication of the monitoring results
Collaboration agreement with academic institutions
Training Plan with descriptive charts
Number of workshops conducted
Consolidation of Fund 
Financed projects
Training Plan
Number of workshops conducted 
Number of women participants 
Businesses started
Number of community leaders
Number of programs implemented
Number of successful courses
Socioenvironmental projects developed
Number of women participants
City members of ISSIN 
Scheduled meetings
Agreements achieved
Agreement signed
Municipal 
Government
General Direction of 
Economic Development
Education Direction
Technical direction
Economic Development 
General Direction
Resilience Office
5, 16
8, 9
3, 11, 16, 17
1, 4, 9, 10
5, 11, 16
10, 16, 17
4, 5, 8, 16
Juarez Strategic Plan
Resilience Office
Municipal Institute for Women
Resilience Office
ET 2 Gender equality and equal rights
ET 2 Gender equality and equal rights
2.3.1 Planning and assessment 
6.1.2 Productivity
6.1.1 Employment
6.2 Entrepreneurs and innovation 
4.1.3 Science, technology, innovation and training
1.1.2. Citizen involvement
2.1.3 Citizen management
7. Public security
Resilient Juarez
Resilient Juarez

[Page 84]
Appendix
Goal 2.2
Foster new business models with a circular economy
Goal 3.1
The right to the city
Goal 2.3
Enhance the image of 
Juarez and its tourist appeal
2.2.1 Municipal Sustainability and 
Circular Economy Program
3.1.1 Prepare and publish the Juarez 
Charter for the Right to the City
2.3.1 Revert Ciudad Juarez’s image
2.2.2 Strategy “+A-D: Más Alimento, Menos Desperdicio” (More Food, 
Less Waste)
3.1.2 Bring the Historic District back to life as a place of social exchange, recreation and cultural identity
3.1.3 Regulation for the
Historic District
2.3.2 Promote tourism and culture in Juarez.
2.3.3 Promote ecotourism in desert settings
Action
Teim
Medium
Medium
Short
Medium
Medium
Short
Medium
Short
Prosperous 
Juarez
Integrated 
Juarez
Indicators:
/ Expected Outcomes
Lead
SDO
PDM 2016 - 2018
Document completed
Preparation of Charter
Published regulation
Number of stakeholders involved
The project completed
The project completed
Ecotourism management plan 
Program for Valle de Juarez
Number of agreements executed
Number of beneficiaries
Declaration 
Published book
Inclusion of roads in the
UNESCO Tentative Lis
Resilience Office
Resilience Office
Resilience Office
Ecology Direction
Resilience Office
Planning and Assessment 
General Direction
Planning and Assessment 
General Direction
IPACULT
Economic development
Technical direction
8, 9, 12, 13
2, 3, 8, 12, 13
3, 8, 11, 16, 17
10, 16, 17
8, 9, 11, 16, 17
9, 11, 16, 17
5.3 Ecology and sustainable development
6 Promotion, economic development, and regulatory improvement
1.1 Open Government and citizen involvement
5.1 .1 Human settlements and urban development
4.3 Culture as an identity element
3.1.3 Supplemental food assistance
4.3 Culture as an identity element
5.1 Urban planning 
6.3 Touristic drive
6.3.1 Promotion of Tourism in 
Ciudad Juarez
6.3.2 Tourism
Resilient Juarez
Resilient Juarez

[Page 85]
Appendix
Goal 3.2
Resilient Planning
Goal 3.3
Connectivity and
Alternative Mobility 
Plan
3.2.1 Institutionalize the Resilience 
Office in Juarez
3.3.1 Transportation-Oriented 
Development Plan (DOT)
3.2.2 Resilience Culture and 
Communications Strategy
3.3.2 Cycle lanes and pedestrian corridors project
3.3.4 Road safety manual
3.2.3 Binational Agenda on Urban 
Resilience at the Northern Border
3.3.3 Interactive map of alternate travel routes
Short
Short
Short
Medium
Short
Short
Long
Action
Term
Integrated 
Juarez
Order creating the office
Number of projects included in portfolio
Presentation of document
Publication in Official Daily of the Federation
Number of cities with strategic alliances
Interactive map developed 
Number of campaigns developed 
Number of downloads
Number of campaigns
Estimated amount of people reached
Number of intervened kilometres
Publication of Handbook 
Training campaigns
And spreading
Mayor
Resilience Office
Social Communication 
General Coordination
Resilience Office
Urban Development 
General Direction
Research and
Planning Municipal 
Institute
Research and Planning 
Municipal Institute
Resilience Office
Resilience Office
2.3. Efficient Government
5.1.3 Mobility
1.2.2 Liaison and communication
5.1.3 Mobility
5.3 Ecology and sustainable development
1.1.2 Citizen involvement
5.1.3 Mobility
5.3 Ecology and sustainable development
1.1.2 Citizen involvement
5.1.3 Mobility
4.3.3 Culture and education for everyone
Indicators:
/ Expected Outcomes
Lead
SDO
PDM 2016 - 2018
10, 16, 17
16, 17
10, 16, 17
10, 11
3, 10, 11
Resilient Juarez
Resilient Juarez

[Page 86]
Appendix
Goal 4.1
Juarez as a model city for climate adaptation
Goal 4.2
Environmental education and culture for citizens and private sector
Goal 4.3
Comprehensive management of water
4.1.1 Environmental agenda for 
Ciudad Juarez
4.1.2 Municipal Climate Adaptation 
Strategy
4.2.1 Municipal Strategy on 
Environmental Education
4.3.1 Innovative project portfolios to aid in floods
4.3.2 Green infrastructure at public spaces
4.2.2 “Urban Orchards” project
Short
Medium
Short
Short
Short
Short
Short
Action
Term
4.2.1.1 Annual Program 10 days, 10 actions
Adapted Juarez
Agenda published 
Initiatives started
Environmental strategy published
Number of educational campaigns
Document published 
Number of revitalized areas
Publication of the pilot project outcome
Number of spaces enhanced with GI 
Number of participants
Number of orchards installed m2 of affected areas
Number of events 
Number of attendees
Plan published
Resilience Office
Ecology Direction
Resilience Office
Ecology Direction
Resilience Office
Resilience Office
Resilience Office
Resilience Office
5.3 Ecology and sustainable development
5.3 Ecology and sustainable development
5.3.3 Promotion of ecological culture
5.1 Urban planning
6.2.1 Coordination with government and civil society
5.1 Urban planning
5.3 Ecology and sustainable development
3.1 Wellbeing and social Development
5.2.4 Green spaces
Indicators:
/ Expected Outcomes
Lead
SDO
PDM 2016 - 2018
11, 12, 13, 15, 17
11, 13, 15, 17
4, 11, 13, 15, 17
6, 9, 11, 13, 15
2, 3, 8, 
12, 13, 15
9, 11, 13, 15
Resilient Juarez
Resilient Juarez

[Page 87]
7.2 Abbreviations and 
Acronyms 
AC Civil Associations
AECOM Architecture, Engineering, Consulting, Operations and Maintenance
BDAN North America Development Bank 
Canirac National Association of the Restaurant and 
Seasoned Food Industry 
CCC Joint Advisory Board
CCE Entrepreneurial Coordinating Council
CI Industrial Associations
Colef Colegio de la Frontera Norte 
CONANP National Commission for Protected Natural Areas
Conavim National Commission to Prevent and 
Eradicate Violence
CONAGUA National Water Commission 
CONEVAL National Council to Assess Social 
Development Policy
CGC Social Communication General Coordination
CRS Social Media Coordination
DAP Public Lighting Direction
DDHAM Human Rights and Assistance to Migrants Direction
DDR Rural Development Direction
DE Education Direction
DEC Ecology Direction
DGCC Community Centers General Direction 
DGDE Economic Development General Direction 
DGDS Social Development General Direction 
DGDU Urban Development General Direction
DGPE Planning and Assessment General Direction
DGI General IT Direction 
DGOP Public Works General Direction 
DGPC General Direction of Public Protection 
DGS General Health Direction
DGTM Municipal General Direction of Transit
DIF Desarrollo Integral de la Familia
DPJ Parks and Gardens Direction 
EPA Environmental Protection Agency 
ERJ Juarez Resilience Strategy 
HIC Habitat International Coalition
IA Academic institutions
IMCO Instituto Mexicano para la Competitividad
IMDC Municipal Sports Institute and Physical Culture of Juarez
IMIP Research and Planning Municipal Institute 
IMJJ Juarez Youth Municipal Institute 
IMM Municipal Institute for Women
Index Juarez Asociación de Maquiladoras A. C.
INECC National Institute of Ecology and Climate Change
INEGI National Institute of Statistics and Geography
IP Private Sector Initiative
Ipacult Cultural Institute of Juarez Municipality
MS Safety desk
ODS Sustainable Development Objectives (SDO) 
OMS World Health Organization 
ONU United Nations Organization 
Orelp Resilience Office at El Paso
OR Resilience Office
OSLC Sustainability Office at Las Cruces 
PDUS Sustainable Urban Development Plan 
PEJ Juarez Strategic Plan
RAE Real Academia Española
RBD Rebuild By Design
SA City Hall Direction
SECTUR Ministry of Tourism
SEDATU Ministry of Agrarian, Territorial and City Development 
SEMARNAT Ministry of the Environment and Natural 
Resources 
SM Sindicatura Municipal
SSPM Municipal Public security Direction
ST Technical Direction
TCEQ 
Texas Commission on Environmental Quality
T-HUB Technology Hub
TOD Transportation-Oriented Development
UNESCO United Nations Organization for Education Science and Culture
UTEP University of Texas at El Paso
Appendix
Resilient Juarez

[Page 88]
Appendix
Acequia (Ditch): Irrigation method used in Juarez to irrigate cultivated land.
City council: Representative body of the community charged with the smooth functioning of the municipality. The city council consists of the mayor and the councillors.
Food basket: A value set on an amount of food that is the minimum standard for health and well-being and that is determined based on the nutritional requirements of a population rather than an individual (CONEVAL).
Sustainable development: The type of development that meets today’s needs without imposing risks on the capacity of future generations to satisfy their needs.
Circular economy: An economy that is restorative or rege7.3 Glossary nerative by intent and by design. It replaces the concept of “expiration” with the idea of “restoration” and moves towards the use of renewable energy sources, reduces the use of toxic chemicals that prevent reuse and return to the biosphere, and aims instead to redefine products and services to eliminate waste while minimizing negative impacts. (Ellen MacArthur Foundation).
Solidarity economy: An approach to economic activity that takes the well-being and quality of life of people into account, that respects the environment, and that prioritizes sustainable development above all other interests.
Empowerment: In political or socioeconomic terms, “to grant power [to a socioeconomically disadvantaged group] so that they can improve their lives through self-determination.” (RAE).
Photo Credit: Iván Bautista
Resilient Juarez
Resilient Juarez

[Page 89]
Appendix
Femicides: The intentional killing of women or girls because of their gender, constituting the most extreme form of violence against women and classified as such in the Mexican criminal system.
Incubator company: A project, company or center that creates and develops small companies or micro businesses, and provides support to such companies during their early stages (Instituto Mexiquense del Emprendedor).
Export maquiladora industry: Any partial product manufacturing, assembly, or packaging by a company that is not the original manufacturer. In Ciudad Juarez, the export maquiladora industry emerged in the mid-1960s as an economic response to labor shortages in developed countries.
Well-being line: Monetary value of a box of food, goods and basic utilities (CONEVAL).
Economically active population: All those of working age with the capacity and availability to contribute to the production of economic goods and services at a particular moment in time. 
Included are people who work or have a job (employed) and those who do not have a job but are willing to work (unemployed). Conversely, an economically inactive population includes those who are not available to work because of age, disability, or personal choice (INEGI).
Porfiriato: Period in Mexican history when Porfirio Díaz (18301915) was the country’s president.
Presidio: City or fortress that could be used as shelter by soldiers serving in the defense of Northern Mexico.
Bracero Program: The Mexican Agricultural Workers Program, better known as the Bracero Program, signed by the 
U.S. and Mexico in 1942. The name refers to Mexican workers, mostly farmer laborers, who were allowed temporary entry into the U.S to make up for labor shortages in the U.S. during and after World War II. According to the Bracero History Archive, an estimated 4.6 million Mexicans came to work in the 
U.S. as braceros between 1942 and 1964, the year in which the program ended. 
Urban Density Increase: A positive or negative change in the population density in an urban area.
Urban revitalization: Reversing the effects of the physical, social and economic deterioration of a downtown area and other important parts of a city, and creating the urban conditions that traditional downtown areas need to be sustainable (Taracena, 2013).
Septentrion: North.
Empty lot: Private, unused land that is subdivided into plots classified as “urban” according to current law, within agglomeration perimeter and that can be used for residential, industrial, commercial, and service purposes. It also refers to taxable land that is no longer classified according to its prior use (Clichevsky, 2007).
Tactical urbanism: Umbrella term for a collection of alternatives for the collaborative, user-generated design, construction, and management of urban spaces, based on the needs, dreams, and ideas of citizens. These alternative projects meet short-term needs and generally bypass the usual government requirements and lengthy processes (Hernandez, 2015).
Vulnerable due to income: A population that is vulnerable based on incomes that are at or below the poverty line.
Resilient Juarez

[Page 90]
7.4 References 
Appendix
Clichevsky, Nora (2007). “La Tierra Vacante ‘revisitada’. Elementos explicativos y potencialidades de utilización” en Cuaderno Urbano N° 6, 195-220, Resistencia, 
Argentina, diciembre de 2007.
Cruz, Cuitláhuac (2010). Sistematización y Administración de Proyectos Ambientales en el distrito federal: Aplicación de la metodología PERT y CPM. Tesis para obtener el grado de maestro en Administración. UNAM.
Hernández, Mary (2015). Diseño de espacios urbanos desde el imaginario y la participación del ciudadano en Revista de Urbanismo 
N°32 – Enero Junio de 2015. Available at: https://revistaurbanismo.uchile.cl/
Padilla, H. (2012). “Ciudad Juarez, sus nombre y sus retos” en Ziccardi, A. (coord.) Ciudades del 2010: entre la sociedad del conocimiento y la desigualdad social. México: Universidad 
Auónoma de México, 891-916.
Sánchez Almanza, A. (2012). “Pobreza y derecho a la Ciudad de México” en Ziccardi, A. (coord.) Ciudades del 2010: entre la sociedad del conocimiento y la desigualdad social. México: Universidad Auónoma de México, 673-685.
Small Arms Survey Research (2012). “Femicide: A Global Problem,” No. 14.
Torre-Marín, G, et al. (2009). “Ecología industrial y desarrollo sustentable” en Revista Ingeniería 13-1 (2009) 63-70.
Plans and programs consulted:
BDAN (2017). Manual de lineamientos de diseño de infraestructura verde.
IMIP (2014). Plan Maestro de Desarrollo Urbano del Centro Histórico de Ciudad Juarez.
IMIP (2015). Plan de Movilidad Ciclista. vilidadsustentable/plan.pdf.
IMIP (2016). Plan de Desarrollo Urbano 
Sustentable para Ciudad Juarez, 2016.
ITDP (2012). Planes Integrales de Movilidad. Lineamientos para una movilidad urbana sutentables. Available at: http://mexico. itdp.org/wp-content/uploads/Planesintegrales-de-movilidad-lineamientos.pdf.
ITDP (2013). Desarrollo Orientado al Transporte. Regenerar las ciudades mexicanas para mejorar la movilidad. Available at: http://mexico.
itdp. org/wp-content/uploads/DesarrolloOrientado-al-Transporte.pdf
Programa Rector de Ecoturismo, 
Turismo Rural, Turismo de Aventura, Gobierno federal.
SEMARNAT (2009). Guía para elaborar programas de educación ambiental no formal. Gobierno federal. Available at: http:// biblioteca.semarnat.gob.mx/janium/ 
Documentos/Ciga/libros2009/ 
CG009094.pdf
Photo credit: Luis Pegut
Resilient Juarez

[Page 93]
http://resiliencia.imip.org.mx juarezresiliente@gmail.com @jrzresiliente /juarezresiliente