[Page 1]
Our City of Tomorrow
A sustainable future for the City of Amsterdam

[Page 2]
Our City of Tomorrow
Counsil Letter Sustainable Future
Foreword 
Hereby we present Our City of Tomorrow, in which we set out the municipal executive’s approach to combating the climate crisis. What awaits the city in the field of sustainability between now and 2026?
We are in the midst of a global climate crisis, the impact of which is substantial – also in Amsterdam. Science shows that global warming is now happening at a faster rate than has ever been measured before, and we are already facing the risk of a 2-degree rise in temperature. 
This also has serious and continuously accelerating consequences for Amsterdam. Climate change in Amsterdam means an increase in extreme rainfall, heat stress, drought and rising sea levels. Not only do we need to protect the people of Amsterdam against these threats, but we must also do everything in our power to combat climate change. In many countries around the world, climate change is already a matter of life or death. The next 20 years are crucial.
Much is already happening, but despite all our efforts, we are not on track. A radical change is needed in our thinking and way of working. Transitions do not follow a predetermined route. We have to take action now. We will have to learn as we go along, and we will inevitably make mistakes.
The municipal executive has the responsibility and the capacity to make every effort now to prevent even more far-reaching consequences and make the necessary adaptations to the effects that are already unavoidable. It is our duty to secure a sustainable and liveable city for current and future generations.
We will do this together – the mayor and all other members of the municipal executive. The climate crisis affects us all, and we must all take responsibility for combating it collectively. 
This is the only way we can achieve our goals.
Femke Halsema,
Mayor of 
Amsterdam
Hester van Buren
Reinier van Dantzig
Rutger Groot Wassink
Melanie van der Horst
Sofyan Mbarki
Touria Meliani
Marjolein Moorman
Zita Pels
Alexander Scholtes
Peter Teesink

[Page 3]
Foreword 
Our City of Tomorrow
The consequences of climate change for Amsterdam 
The City of 2026 
Unequal investment for equal opportunities as a guiding principle
Our approach 1 - accelerating together 
Our approach 2 - powerful instruments and actions 
What can Amsterdam expect from us in the coming years?
Three transitions towards a climate-neutral, nature-inclusive, climate-adaptive and circular city
1. The transition to sustainable energy
2. The transition to a green and healthy city
3. The transition to a circular economy
In conclusion

[Page 4]
Our City of Tomorrow “The actions implemented in this decade will have impacts for thousands of years” (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change) 
Our City of Tomorrow  Counsil Letter Sustainable Future

[Page 5]
Our City of Tomorrow  Counsil Letter Sustainable Future
No time to lose
We are in the midst of a global climate crisis, the impact of which is immense. We are already in danger of heading for 2 degrees of global warming. This will bring disastrous consequences, with both extreme drought and flooding. We are also seeing the effects of global warming in our own city. Heavy showers leave basements under water and streets flooded. Prolonged heat waves are drying out our parks in the summer and are hard to endure for residents in poorly ventilated homes. 

At 2 degrees of warming, 5% of all living things will be threatened with extinction. And as we are all aware, if the sea level continues to rise, 
Amsterdam will no longer be dry land. We have to protect the city and our residents from these inevitable consequences. At the same time, we now have the responsibility and the capacity to make every effort to limit even more far-reaching effects of climate change as much as possible.
Every effort
Sustainability is no longer an ambition; it is a dire necessity. In many countries around the world, climate change is already a matter of life or death, a humanitarian disaster that often affects the people who have contributed the least to its causes. According to the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), cities play a crucial role in achieving ambitious cuts in emissions and driving climate-resilient development. 
In a global context, Amsterdam and its residents have very high emissions per person.
Of all Amsterdam’s CO2 emissions, 81% result from the use of materials. 
Although this CO2 is not emitted in Amsterdam, it is nonetheless emitted by Amsterdammers, and has a major impact on communities elsewhere in the world. If everyone on earth lived like a Dutch person, this year we would consume the resources of 3.6 earths, according to the Global Footprint Network.
Climate change has an impact on the lives of everyone, and perhaps most of all on the young. Research by the Netherlands Youth Institute has shown that climate change is having a negative impact on young people’s mental well-being. It is therefore crucial to offer prospects for a hopeful future.
So far we have not succeeded in halting climate change. Our task is to take care of the city; the city of today and the city of the future. Our city of tomorrow.

[Page 6]
Our City of Tomorrow
Counsil Letter Sustainable Future
We can do this
Amsterdam is taking the responsibility to act now – even if it hurts. We are showing the next generations of Amsterdammers that we have done what was necessary to protect the city and the world, and maintain its liveability. We know we can do it. There is no shortage of smart green initiatives, and we are supporting them as much as possible. In 
Amsterdam, 9.6% less gas was used in 2022 than in previous years, the 
Hermitage museum and the Hortus botanical gardens share the same thermal energy storage, and sustainable tenders for land allocation are very successful. Good examples of green housing initiatives are Elements in Amstelkwartier, De Warren on Centrumeiland, Juf Nienke in Sluisbuurt, 
The Valley in the Zuidas district and Geins in Zuidoost.
Residents are also firmly taking the initiative, working together to make their energy supply more sustainable and their neighbourhoods greener. In the district of Zuidoost, for example, since June 2022, a neighbourhood biodigester has been producing biogas using the food leftovers of seven catering companies. KetelhuisWG is a local energy cooperative for the WG neighbourhood in Amsterdam Oud-West, in which residents and local businesses have taken matters into their own hands to future-proof their neighbourhood. And thanks to a textile repair discount scheme launched in 2021, Amsterdam has seen an increase in clothing repairs.
For all Amsterdammers
Together we are making Amsterdam a sustainable city. A pleasant city where our children can safely play outside in parks and gardens, in clean air because there are fewer cars and fewer emissions. A city in which everyone lives in a well-insulated home, with low energy costs thanks to locally generated, clean energy. An accessible city, with more space for bicycles and pedestrians, and with good, affordable public transport. 
Where food is produced locally, and waste is reused as a raw material.
A better climate starts with a better government – one that ensures that all Amsterdammers are able to participate. Only then can we succeed in making this great change. Amsterdam is therefore investing in and for the people who need investment most. We are starting with insulating the worst homes with the most vulnerable residents. We are investing in our public buildings and school buildings and creating jobs for people who were educated at vocational level in our own city. We want everyone to benefit from the energy transition. Residents must be able to share the power generated by wind turbines or solar panels in their neighbourhood, so that their energy bills fall. We are facing a huge challenge, and our solutions must be based on fairness. If they are not, existing inequalities will only grow.
No matter how much we do to combat climate change, we will still have to protect Amsterdam against extreme weather conditions and make the city resilient to heat, drought and flooding. Much like in other cases, extreme weather often means that vulnerable groups lose out, for example because there are fewer trees in their neighbourhood to absorb the heat. It is therefore important that we listen to the needs and ideas of our residents, businesses and academic institutions in order to find solutions together.

[Page 7]
Our City of Tomorrow
Counsil Letter Sustainable Future
To make the necessary change, as a municipal executive, we must dare to make difficult but unavoidable choices, and to do what is effective, not just what feels good. The city and our lives are going to change - they must change. And sustainability applies to everyone, in every neighbourhood, every street, every home. It is a huge challenge for us all. 
Taking joint responsibility
This municipal executive must lead by example. As a local government, we will make use of every role we hold: landowner, property owner, tax collector, licensing authority, legislator, law enforcer, purchaser, subsidy provider, care provider and shareholder. We are procuring goods and services as sustainably as possible and making our buildings climateproof. As an active shareholder, we are committed to making Schiphol 
Airport more sustainable with fewer flights. 
But we can’t do this alone. We urgently need the participation of everyone in the city – the people in education and healthcare, for example, who are able to reach many Amsterdammers. We also work with central government and other European cities facing the same major challenges. In cooperation with central government, for example, we can demand responsibility from the major emitters that are hard for us to tackle as a city on our own. After all, if we are asking a lot of our residents, then we must also ask a lot of the major polluters. If they do not participate, there is no place for them in our city.
For a green, liveable city
This transition is a long-term undertaking, but we no longer have the time to plan the route precisely. We have to pick up speed now and learn from our mistakes along the way, by trial and error. There is no alternative.
We want to be a liveable city that takes its responsibility seriously, particularly because we are a city with a large footprint. This calls for a municipal government which invests and provides stimulus, and which supports courageous residents, civil servants, administrators and businesses in making difficult choices, and for companies that produce fairly and locally. Together we must work to achieve a greener city with new jobs, healthier residents and less climate damage.

[Page 8]
The consequences of climate change for Amsterdam 
Future generations must see that we did everything that was necessary.
Our City of Tomorrow  Counsil Letter Sustainable Future

[Page 9]
Our City of Tomorrow
Counsil Letter Sustainable Future
Global warming is happening faster than has ever previously been measured or observed. It is causing natural systems to change to a level beyond which they can recover. These so called tipping points can reinforce one another, for example causing sea levels to rise even faster. In 2022 the global temperature rise stood at 1.2 degrees and we are rapidly approaching 
1.5 degrees, a level we will probably reach before 
2030. The IPCC says that it will now be hard to avoid a 2-degree rise. In the absence of more robust policy, the increase may reach 3.2 degrees by 2100. 
Major consequences
This also has serious and accelerating consequences for Amsterdam. 
Climate change in Amsterdam means an increase in extreme rainfall, heat stress, drought and sea level rise. The way in which our city has been intensely developed and constructed in recent decades makes us particularly vulnerable to the changes that are coming our way. Both the city’s infrastructure and its historic buildings and works of art are highly sensitive to heat and drought, damage and decay.
Inequality of opportunity 
We are also already seeing the negative effects of extreme weather on 
Amsterdam residents who have few means to protect themselves. This is leading to an increase in inequality of opportunity and segregation, greater social unrest and a decrease in confidence in the government. 
Less affluent people who live in small, poorly insulated homes suffer more from heat, and have fewer opportunities to escape it. For the elderly, it can even be fatal. This is already evident; in 2019, the excess mortality in the Netherlands due to heat amounted to more than 
500 deaths. Heat stress also reduces labour productivity and results in poorer learning performance due to insomnia and concentration problems. Climate change therefore leads to an increase in inequality of opportunity, because it is chiefly the schools in vulnerable neighbour­ hoods that are unable to cool their classrooms adequately.
A stable city
Floods cause serious disruption and major expense to society. In the event of flooding, social amenities such as hospitals, care homes and schools may become inaccessible or unusable. The damage and the cost of pumping away the water can be high. Flood risks also put restrictions on the development of the city. A ‘shock event’, such as a major flood, may actually result in so much damage and affect so many victims that it causes the city to become financially unstable. Drought and subsidence cause wooden foundation piles to rot, which increases the inequality between wealthy and less affluent homeowners. People with money can more easily finance new foundations, while those who are less prosperous depend on government support. Finally, there may be an increased incidence of disease, for example because people in 
Amsterdam are affected more frequently by tropical diseases.

[Page 10]
Our City of Tomorrow
Counsil Letter Sustainable Future
A resilient city
We must focus not only on preventing climate change, but also on protecting the city and its inhabitants as much as possible from the effects of extreme weather conditions. We can do this by structurally integrating measures to combat the risks of extreme weather into the joint task of making Amsterdam climate adaptive. New standards, requirements and guidelines are needed to fulfil this task successfully. 
Newly built or substantially renovated buildings must be able to cope with at least 60 millimetres of rainwater from a shower of one hour and drain it within 60 hours. Our vital infrastructure must even be able to cope with 90 millimetres of rainwater in one hour. We are translating the climate risks into stress maps and are helping with the implementation of measures. The maps provide insight into risk factors for different extreme weather conditions, exposure, sensitivity and adaptability. This information can help us to determine what problems may arise where and what can be done about them.
A green city
Our goal is that by 2050 Amsterdam must be fully prepared for the changing climate. Our approach is described in the Climate Adaptation 
Strategy (Strategie Klimaatadaptatie) and the Climate Adaptation 
Implementation Agenda (Uitvoeringsagenda Klimaatadaptatie). Green spaces, such as parks, gardens and nature areas, are an essential element of this approach. We are working to create a continuous green ecological structure with high biodiversity and a natural green-blue network in the design of every new neighbourhood. We are also opting for nature-inclusive, green and biodiverse solutions when constructing or redesigning public space. For example, in major redevelopment projects, measures are taken to ensure the area is better prepared for extreme weather conditions. As part of the ‘Amsterdam Rainproof’ approach, we are organising community actions in the districts of Nieuw-West, Noord and Zuidoost, in collaboration with housing corporations, neighbourhood organisations and residents, for example in replacing hard surfaces with planting in gardens. Where possible, we are linking these actions to other activities in a neighbourhood, and offering particular support to residents for whom it is more difficult to work on their garden or surroundings themselves.

[Page 11]
The City of 2026 
Visual ©Ontwerpwerk
Our City of Tomorrow  Counsil Letter Sustainable Future

[Page 12]
Unequal investment for equal opportunities as a guiding principle
We know where we want to go; how we get there, we learn along the way.

Our City of Tomorrow  Counsil Letter Sustainable Future

[Page 13]
Our City of Tomorrow
Counsil Letter Sustainable Future
Limiting the consequences of the climate crisis, raw-material crisis and biodiversity crisis requires a radical change in our thinking, working methods, organisation and behaviour. This applies to all our municipal employees and to residents, entrepreneurs and companies. Sustainability is not optional.
Confidence, courage and perseverance
Unfortunately, despite all our efforts, we are not on track to achieve our sustainability goals regarding energy and material use. We need a fresh approach, introducing new ways of working and phasing out non-sustainable working methods. This will take some getting used to, will be painful at times, and will call for complex decisions and choices. 
A transition of this kind will always comprise a difficult phase, during which we already have a lot of knowledge, but we still have a lot to learn. We know more or less where we want to go and what we need to change, but as for the way to achieve it and what effect it will have on our organisation and the city, we will have to learn as we go along. 
So let’s make a start. Not by running pilots, but by implementing plans in full as the new normal, and inevitably making mistakes. This will require confidence, courage and perseverance from all of us. In principle, our course of action will be based on existing frameworks such as the coalition agreement.
Inclusive prosperity 
The starting point for our approach is inclusive prosperity, building on the model of the doughnut economy that Amsterdam has already embraced. 
We want to gain insight into the impact of our policy and actions in key economic, ecological, spatial and social fields, so that we can take appropriate management decisions, make qualitative considerations and arrive at transparent choices. In doing so, we wish to avoid reinforcing existing inequalities, both in Amsterdam and elsewhere in the world.
Unequal investment for equal opportunities
The basic principle of inclusive prosperity is crucial. The consequences of the various transitions are not the same for everyone. Groups in advantaged positions are often better able to participate or benefit, while those in vulnerable positions are more likely to bear the risks and burdens. Moreover, their voices are not always heard.
If decision-making and policy outcomes are unjust, they can lead to greater inequality and less public support. For the current municipal executive, unequal investment for equal opportunities is therefore a guiding principle. The measures to combat climate change can lead to high costs and thus carry the risk of negatively affecting the livelihoods of residents and local business owners. Through unequal investment for equal opportunities, we aim to improve the position of vulnerable groups, also with regard to climate transitions.

[Page 14]
Our City of Tomorrow
Counsil Letter Sustainable Future
Following the report Justice in Climate Policy (Rechtvaardigheid in klimaatbeleid) produced by the Netherlands Scientific Council for 
Government Policy [1], the City of Amsterdam is currently investigating the social impact of the energy transition and policy and what is needed to ensure the transition takes place with fairness. This investigation is directed at the built environment, power generation and infrastructure, mobility, and the labour market, and the question of how we can ensure that benefits and burdens are shared fairly and all Amsterdammers are able to participate in decision-making.
Unequal investment for equal opportunity means:
• The strongest shoulders bear the heaviest burden and the benefits reach vulnerable groups with the aim of ending energy poverty by 2030;
• Open access to the decision-making process for all Amsterdammers;
• Fair opportunities in a changing labour market, for example by providing the technical training necessary for sustainable transitions;
• Helping citizens to organise services at community level, for example by means of an energy cooperative.
WRR, Rechtvaardigheid in klimaatbeleid, 10 February 2023

[Page 15]
Our City of Tomorrow
Counsil Letter Sustainable Future
Amsterdam Climate Action Plan
Amsterdam is making every effort as a responsible capital city. These are the main points in the Amsterdam Climate Action Plan.
1. Unequal investment for equal opportunities will always be our guiding principle; we are committed to a social transition. An example is that in insulating homes we are prioritising residents in a vulnerable position and we will develop an Action plan for Energy saving through which we help neighbourhoods reduce their energy use.
2. From now on, the starting point for all decision-making and implementation is: ‘sustainable, unless’. If for some reason it is not possible to realise sustainability, this must be substantiated, and on this basis the City will make a decision based in principle on the undertakings set out in the current coalition agreement.
3. We will structurally integrate the risks of extreme weather in the joint task of making Amsterdam climate adaptive. We are developing new standards, requirements and guidelines to protect Amsterdam as much as possible against the effects of extreme weather conditions.
4. In establishing the executive agency Energy for the City, we are committed to accelerating the energy transition. The time for policy plans and visions is over: now we have to act.
5. By means of an administrative assignment entitled A Sustainable
Future for the City and Municipal Organisation (Duurzame Toekomst
Stad en Organisatie), we are committing municipal departments and city districts jointly to realise sustainability in a timely manner for the city as a whole and within the municipal organisation itself, in part by providing insight into the climate footprint for each budget programme. A further aim of the administrative assignment is to realise area-oriented management, such that the plan for each area is appropriate to the neighbourhood, ensuring the transitions are implemented fairly and inclusively.
6. We are preparing a public heating grid for Amsterdam, in which the affordability of residents’ energy bills will be paramount.
7. We act as an active shareholder with regard to organisations in which we hold participating interests, and we call on them to draw up impact plans.
8. We are working on the establishment of a new sustainability council and a climate consultation hour to facilitate input from underrepresented groups both within and beyond Amsterdam.
9. Circularity will become the standard, incorporating more intelligent production and less consumption. We will also help at least 100 businesses a year to make their operations circular.
10.
 Our procurement policy is aimed not only at making our own organisation more sustainable, but also at ensuring the market becomes more sustainable more quickly. Our practices include circular procurement and the application of an internal CO2 price.
The rest of this document sets out how we are implementing these points and what other measures we are taking.

[Page 16]
Our approach 
1 - accelerating together 
Investing in sustainability now will pay off handsomely in the future.

Our City of Tomorrow  Counsil Letter Sustainable Future

[Page 17]
Our City of Tomorrow
Counsil Letter Sustainable Future
To meet our goals, we need to accelerate. We will achieve this on the basis of existing plans, such as the 
Amsterdam Climate Neutral Road Map, the Heating 
Transition Vision, the Green Vision and the Amsterdam 
Circular Strategy. We can only realise this acceleration in cooperation with our partners: housing corporations, educational institutions, residents and companies. 
Support for residents’ initiatives
The number of initiatives by residents is steadily growing. There are residents who want to start their own heating company, for example, or they choose to have a greater say in their future heating supply. The municipal executive aims to enable people living in the area and other 
Amsterdam residents to share in the benefits of the energy transition. 
Our ambition is therefore that 100% of all future wind turbines will be developed in a cooperative form, so that they will be locally owned. All 
Amsterdammers will thus benefit from locally and sustainably generated energy, including those on a low income.
To make participation as accessible as possible, we support initiators on the basis of co-creation. Besides the provision of funding, this may involve help with self-organisation or research, or support for residents who wish to contribute to discussions or decision-making. In neighbourhoods in which we are active, we always seek cooperation with neighbourhood platforms and cooperatives. Examples include our collaboration with the neighbourhood platform Hart for the K-buurt and the Buurtwerkkamer in the district of Zuidoost, the neighbourhood cooperative De Eester in the eastern docklands area, and the citywide networking organisation 02025.
Investment in education
In the coming years, it will be important to develop talent in all areas – practical, theoretical and scientific – in order to implement the necessary system change. The changing economy requires a number of skills that are currently in short supply. An adjustment in the range of available training to deal with these developments will not simply happen by itself. The City is connecting supply and demand by organising events such as ‘Job with a Future’, collaborating with institutions such as the 
Amsterdam University of Applied Sciences and vocational training courses. In the 2023-2027 agenda for secondary vocational education (MBO agenda 2023-2027), we are investing in new projects and initiatives that contribute to high-quality and future-proof secondary vocational education. Technical training courses that prepare people to implement the sustainable transitions are of particular importance.
Support for homeowners
Housing corporations are important partners in accelerating the energy transition, and this year we will be making new agreements with them for the next four years about insulating homes and making them gasfree. At the same time, more than 22,000 homeowners’ associations in 
Amsterdam will also need to take action. However, with regard to making buildings sustainable, homeowners encounter major organisational, financial, legal and social obstacles. We want to encourage, guide

[Page 18]
Our City of Tomorrow
Counsil Letter Sustainable Future and support these associations as much as possible. To strengthen their position, we are therefore working closely with central government and the National Heating Fund, in the first instance by increasing the associations’ financing facilities. 
Assistance for SMEs & agreements with major polluters
In cooperation with the SME association MKB-Amsterdam, we are helping SMEs to become more sustainable by providing them with the right information. We offer free customised advice via both an energy helpdesk and on-site guidance. We support business collectives and business parks in applying for relevant subsidies and in collective purchasing campaigns, for example for the installation of solar panels or charging infrastructure. And we are making agreements with the ten largest polluters about making their industrial processes more sustainable. The City is working closely with the Province of North 
Holland, Port of Amsterdam and regional partners to jointly organise the transition to electrification and the use of (green) hydrogen. We also involve companies in accelerating the achievement of our goals.
Within the networks of companies with which the City cooperates, such as in the textile and timber industries and other value streams, we are taking steps to determine and reduce the social and ecological effects of our actions in the rest of the world. The first results of this can be seen in the Denim Deal, timber deal and City for Forest agreements.
Additional central government measures
We also cooperate with central government. While we are generally positive about the package of additional climate provisions[1] that has been announced, we are also jointly considering tightening and supplementing the measures. Extensive funding is to be made available for measures to achieve the CO2 target, but additional pricing and standardisation measures are required.
We are calling for continued attention in climate policy for climate justice. This also relates to the many billions of euros in fossil subsidies, including the financial benefits that large-scale energy consumers receive. We advocate the phasing out of benefits for large-scale consumers as quickly as possible.
International cooperation
As a city, we look beyond borders; our impact does not stop at the city limits. Amsterdam was selected last year to participate in the EU mission to deliver 100 climate-neutral and smart cities by 2030. This means that we will conclude a ‘city climate contract’ with the EU, in which we will make agreements about what we will do ourselves to achieve our goals more quickly. This contract is to be completed in the first half of 2024.
In addition, we are working with academic institutions in Amsterdam, other municipalities, the Amsterdam Metropolitan Area, the Province of 
North Holland, central government and the EU. We are investigating
Kamerbrief over voorjaarsbesluitvorming Klimaat, 26 april 2023

[Page 19]
Our City of Tomorrow
Counsil Letter Sustainable Future what is needed to achieve our objectives more quickly and what we need from the EU and central government. In doing so, we are investigating a more intelligent and efficient combined use of municipal, national, 
European and private funds to finance the city’s sustainability in the long term. At EU level, it is important that appropriate legislation regarding the circular economy is put in place to reform markets sustainably.
Innovation districts
It is not possible to meet societal challenges such as that of sustainability without innovation. To increase Amsterdam’s innovative capacity, the 
City is committed to strengthening various innovation districts, in which leading companies and/or academic institutions come together with startups, incubators and accelerators. The City’s approach to this is set out in the Amsterdam Innovation Districts Strategy.
Connection with specific target groups
In recent years, we have made agreements with a wide range of partners on meeting the challenge of sustainability. Examples include the Warm 
Amsterdam partnership, which emerged from the Gas-Free City Deal, and the Circular and Conceptual Building City Deal, through which we focus on the acceleration of sustainable and circular housing as part of a national network.
In the coming years, we will make extra efforts to enter into dialogue with members of specific target groups that are currently underrepresented, but who may find it more difficult to bear the effects of the transition. This includes vulnerable young people, residents of Master Plan areas, people with education at vocational level, and Amsterdammers with a migrant background. As a responsible capital, we will also enter into dialogue with organisations that represent the interests of places elsewhere in the world that are already suffering serious effects of climate change.
Climate consultation hours
Supplementing regular public participation in projects, in the coming period we will be exploring and experimenting with different forms to facilitate the conversation with Amsterdam residents. Deputy Mayor 
Zita Pels will be establishing a climate consultation hour to make it as easy as possible for residents and businesses to discuss concerns and solutions. We are also considering a new form of sustainability council with residents, and the application in the field of sustainability of the recently established Youth Advisory Council for Amsterdam (Jara). In addition, the results and lessons learned from the Citizens’ Council for Waste may give cause to consider the establishment of a citizens’ council for climate.
Practical implementation
The practical implementation of all agreements from the national climate agreement takes place via five national consultation bodies on implementation, building on the five platforms representing different sectors which played an important role during the establishment of the climate agreements (power, industry, mobility, built environment and agriculture, and land use). In addition, a National Climate Platform has been established to accelerate climate policy by bridging the gap

[Page 20]
Our City of Tomorrow  Counsil Letter Sustainable Future between the issues at play in society and the policy processes in central government. This approach is also an option for Amsterdam to facilitate organised dialogue with the city, discussing opportunities and obstacles, aspects of our city that we want to maintain or change, and ways to adjust our working methods to what is currently needed. We are exploring what we can learn from this national approach, where we can possibly participate and how we can apply it to our own acceleration.

[Page 21]
Our approach 
2 - powerful instruments and actions 
To realise the necessary acceleration, we will reassess existing instruments of government, develop new ones and – with suitable, solid preconditions in place – take action.

Our City of Tomorrow  Counsil Letter Sustainable Future

[Page 22]
Our City of Tomorrow
Counsil Letter Sustainable Future
Sustainable, unless
The goals we have set are not optional. From now on, all decision-making and implementation will be based on the principle of ‘sustainable, unless’. 
Where municipal departments or city districts, either collectively or individually, encounter obstacles to the implementation of a sustainable solution, be they policy-related, financial, technical, legal, contractual or otherwise, the application of the ‘unless’ must be substantiated. On this basis, the municipal executive will make a decision based in principle on the undertakings set out in the current coalition agreement. We realise that this will produce tensions and will require decision-making on a case-by-case basis. The purpose of the ‘sustainable, unless’ principle is to arrive at new standards that contribute to the timely realisation of our goals. These standards may be higher in one domain than in another. 
The trade-off between climate goals, other politically agreed aims and scarce resources is an administrative choice. We know that not all domains already have sufficient insight into what form these sustainability standards should take and what consequences they will bring. 
Nevertheless, given the societal urgency, we are now establishing this principle so that we can develop these new standards together and learn to apply them in all relevant domains. We will apply this in concrete terms to three elements: (a) sustainable working methods will always be applied within the municipal organisation and public services, (b) if additional resources are required, this will be submitted to the municipal executive as part of the regular planning and control cycle, and (c) all departments will determine what they require in order to adhere to the principle of ‘sustainable, unless’. This includes planning for the event that the funds available at that moment prove to be too limited.
Instruments of government: the administrative assignment and team
In 2030 we aim to be a circular, climate-neutral municipal organisation and generate as much energy as possible ourselves. We want to work in a climate-adaptive environment, with municipal employees who have a strong awareness of sustainable ways of thinking and acting. 
To achieve this, we are initiating an administrative assignment aimed at incorporating the task of sustainability throughout the municipal organisation, under the title A Sustainable Future for the City and 
Municipal Organisation (Duurzame Toekomst Stad en Organisatie). 
By means of this administrative assignment, we are also rolling out the principle of ‘sustainable, unless’ at city level. We appeal to all organisational units to fulfil this assignment to the maximum of their ability, and ensure that everyone within the organisation feels responsible and is aware that working on sustainability is not optional, so that the entire organisation supports the common task. 
At the initiative of the municipal executive, a Sustainable Future administrative team has been established, in which deputy mayors and two administrative representatives of the city districts will make key decisions to start, scale up, sustain and accelerate the implementation.

[Page 23]
Our City of Tomorrow
Counsil Letter Sustainable Future
Implementation agendas as a practical tool for implementation
We also set implementation agendas, which are instruments to translate existing policy into concrete guidelines for implementation in practice. 
These agendas are aimed at our own organisation and at the themes of zero-emission mobility, circular economy, food strategy, the heating transition and making historic and listed buildings more sustainable. 
This summer, a new implementing body will be established, Energy for the City, tasked with realising the energy transition in Amsterdam. 
This organisation will be responsible for managing the implementation of the entire transition, realising projects and removing any obstacles. 
Implementation projects will be transferred to this new organisation in phases, starting with heating and electricity.
Task-oriented working method
The working method of Amsterdam’s municipal government is now taskoriented, which means that rather than only one or a limited number of organisational units holding primary responsibility for the implementation of a task, everyone does collectively. This also applies to the issue of sustainability. The change has brought a new form of cooperation and a stronger sense of joint responsibility to achieve our sustainability goals.
By gaining insight into the climate footprint of each programme, we are able to make good decisions as to how we can reduce it, whether by doing things more sustainably or perhaps by not doing them at all. 
In a learning process, we are establishing a clear picture of the climate footprint for each programme, and it is included in the annual statement of accounts for climate, which is part of the budget. We will initially use this annual statement to gain insight, but in the future we will use it increasingly as an instrument of government. We are moving towards using a climate budget during the term of the next coalition. 
Procurement policy: reuse and CO2 pricing
The procurement process is an important instrument to realise our ambitions for sustainability. With a procurement budget of more than €2.8 billion a year, we can make a difference. On the one hand, we use this amount to make our own organisation more sustainable, on the other hand it serves as leverage in the market to promote a sustainable economy. Through our own circular commissioning and procurement – 50% in 2025 – we are setting a good example as a municipality. This starts with the question of whether a purchase is really necessary or whether a different solution is possible. ‘Reuse, unless’ is a key principle in physical projects.
We are doing all we can to reduce the negative impact of our municipal procurement and to increase its positive impact. Since April 2023, it has been mandatory to apply internal CO2 pricing for investment applications of over a million euros. In this way, all or part of the societal costs are already taken into account. As part of the evaluation in 2024, we will look at the possibilities of extending this CO2 pricing to tenders and other societal costs, for example in the form of true pricing. 
In addition to CO2 costs, the ecological and social impact are also given a value. We are also currently establishing concrete action frameworks on sustainability for procurement.

[Page 24]
Our City of Tomorrow
Counsil Letter Sustainable Future
Sustainability performance of external organisations
The City of Amsterdam holds participating interests in 24 organisations, small and large. Each of them, like the City itself, must pursue ambitious goals to make a positive impact on people and the environment. We therefore ask these organisations to draw up impact plans. Particularly in the case of larger organisations such as Schiphol Group and Port of Amsterdam, unconventional choices can have a major impact in preventing emissions, raw material consumption and decrease in biodiversity. As a partner, but also as an active shareholder, the City aims to influence the sustainability performance of the organisations in which it holds participating interests. Deputy Mayor Hester van Buren will be putting forward an exploration of how we can give substance to this in relation to Schiphol Airport.
Area-oriented management
Each area of the city has its own urban structure, population structure, social network, history and identity. The sustainability challenges (heat stress, waste processing, flooding, competition for space) are very different in Nieuwendam, Watergraafsmeer, Buitenveldert, Osdorp, 
Bijlmermeer or Weesp. Moreover, an entire city or district is too large to be able to focus on all aspects of sustainability. Each area therefore requires its own effective and programmatic approach. Only in this way will we be able to shape the transitions inclusively and fairly, with an eye for the burden that falls on different residents, businesses and civil society organisations, and their capacity to bear it. We will thus relieve the burden for groups in the most vulnerable position, ensuring that in the transition to sustainability the security of their livelihoods is maintained. The extent and urgency of the issues in this area are particularly great in the districts of Zuidoost, Nieuw-West and Noord.
This calls for management, coordination and collaboration on design, programming and implementation at local level. With a view to normalising sustainability, it is also necessary that explicit and timely attention is devoted to management and maintenance in design, implementation and financing. Collaboration with the city districts is essential for area-oriented management. The sustainability coordinators in the city districts play an important role in exchanging locally relevant information and advice with the city’s knowledge and implementation services. However, their key task is also to help support local initiatives by residents, companies and institutions.

[Page 25]
Our City of Tomorrow
Counsil Letter Sustainable Future
Communications about the ‘sustainable future’ 
Residents and businesses often take action themselves. We support this by ensuring that these good examples contribute to even more involvement on the part of Amsterdammers working together – according to their own capabilities – towards a liveable city. This requires a strategic and campaign-based approach. 
The current communication strategy continues to apply:
 
• Inform: what is happening in Amsterdam at present and what is going to happen in the future? Why are we doing it?
 
• Inspire: highlight those who have already adapted, as a good example for others – ‘We can do this!’ 
• Facilitate: ensure short routes to seeking support from the municipality, both directly and through partners in the city.
An action plan will be updated for a longer period. This includes the following principles (some of which are already current):
 
• In the autumn of 2023, we will initiate a recognisable communication strategy to take a long-term and campaign-based approach to involving residents and businesses in the task of protecting the city against the consequences of climate change.
 
• Our communications will be reliable, accessible and understandable. 
This means that we will provide clear insight into the decision-making process regarding policy and the issues and dilemmas that are considered. Through communications, we will involve residents and businesses in policy and implementation in a timely manner.
 
• We will set a good example as a municipality and inform the public about this.
 
• We will organise our communications on a city-wide basis regarding the separate fields in the transition to sustainability (insulation, savings, gas-free, zero emissions, power, wind, solar), and place key emphasis on providing information on activities in the neighbourhoods/areas. We will inspire local initiatives in which cooperation and results are central, and communicate at area level about the plans the City itself has in place. The theme is ‘Working on our own sustainable neighbourhood’. This means we will link up with existing local communication channels, which are often also aimed at specific target groups. The objective is to actively inform, inspire and facilitate residents, and to involve them in making their neighbourhood more sustainable and improving liveability. We will celebrate successes, learn from each other by communicating about them and share this through the available channels with everyone in 
Amsterdam who is working on a sustainable future.
 
• We will depict the city of the future using forms such as film, theatre and animation. In such a major transition, it is important that 
Amsterdammers are able to imagine what is taking place and how it will affect their lives in the future. By using the arts, we hope to inspire a variety of target groups and encourage behavioural change.
 
• Sustainability is everyone’s responsibility. This also means that our communications about sustainability will connect with existing sectors, activities and festivals. With a mobile information stand, we will be present at local festivities and large-scale events such as De 
Opening (formerly the Uitmarkt), calling on the art and culture sector to contribute to picturing the future of the city. The 750th anniversary of the founding of Amsterdam will also offer opportunities to present a sustainable future for the city, for example in the digital model that

[Page 26]
Our City of Tomorrow
Counsil Letter Sustainable Future 
•is being created. We ask museums to investigate the possibilities of mounting exhibitions on the theme of climate and sustainability.
 
• In our communications, we will actively support events such as National 
Climate Week or World Environment Day.
 
• We will support youth activities at neighbourhood level, and organise activities on the theme of residents realising their own sustainable neighbourhood.
 
• We will make use of all existing municipal communication channels, in particular those related to sustainability and climate. We will investigate how we can reach specific target groups even more effectively, because for communications this task is also essential; everyone must be able to participate, and this requires accessible and understandable communications.
Financial coverage
By accelerating now, we will avoid huge costs in the future: for every euro that is not spent on the transition today, the cost will be incurred manyfold at a later stage. According to the IMF, investments of billions in a low-carbon world will pay for themselves twice over; every euro spent on climate solutions will yield €1.5 to €4 in profit and cost savings to society[1]. This calls for solid evidence of avoided costs and the development of well-embedded instruments of government to making administrative and official decisions. We will be conducting research to establish a clearer picture in the context of Amsterdam. 
We are also aware that we have to provide financial coverage for the costs we incur now. Because the City is task-oriented, and sustainability is a horizontal theme within the budget, the costs are covered as much as possible by regular budgets. In addition, the following resources are available:
 
• The structural and incidental budgets for the various sustainability policy themes in the budget; 
• Extra resources for sustainability agreed upon in coalition agreement; 
• The remainder of the Climate Fund (intended for a neighbourhoodoriented approach to energy in the built environment); 
• The Amsterdam Sustainability Fund for loans to companies, social organisations, energy cooperatives etc to fund energy measures; 
• The central government resources for the implementation of the climate agreements. For 2023, this amounts to €16.8 million for Amsterdam. 
This is expected to increase further in the coming years;
Article Trouw: ‘Klimaatakkoord levert financieel veel meer op dan het kost’

[Page 27]
Our City of Tomorrow
Counsil Letter Sustainable Future
• Various profitable and unprofitable investments with a sustainability component, such as the €150 million increase in scope for investment for 2023-2027 to make real estate more sustainable. The 2024 budget includes a proposal to divide the investment scope across the various domains.
We work with partners who focus on social impact and sustainability. For example, we are exploring the possibility of additional resources for the transitions with sustainable financial stakeholders for the public sector, such as BNG Bank and De Nederlandse Waterschapsbank. Together with relevant partners, such as corporations, we are lobbying central government so that they too have sufficient resources to implement sustainability measures.
Efficient use of resources
The task of achieving the transitions to sustainability is huge and resources are limited. Each year we consider how we can use the available resources as effectively and efficiently as possible. However, the possibility remains that during the implementation of activities, additional resources may prove to be necessary. The city council will be involved in this as part of the City’s regular planning and control cycle.

[Page 28]
What can Amsterdam expect from us in the coming years?
Three transitions towards a climate-neutral, nature-inclusive, climate-adaptive and circular city
Our City of Tomorrow  Counsil Letter Sustainable Future

[Page 29]
Three sustainable transitions 
Three sustainable transitions for
Inclusive prosperity within the boundaries of our planet 
Energy transition
Circular transition 
Green transition
Reduction in C02 emissions in the city
Reduction in use of raw materials in the city
Precondition: More personnel in construction, engineering and horticulture 
Our City of Tomorrow
Counsil Letter Sustainable Future
The task of achieving sustainability is complex and interrelated in many aspects. To make the task feasible, we distinguish three transitions with which we combat climate change. By taking this approach, by 2026 we will be ready to make optimal use of the final four years in the run-up to 2030 to achieve the following objectives:
1. Transition to sustainable energy a climate-neutral city by 2050, a 60% reduction in CO2 emissions by 2030 (compared to 1990), including zero-emission mobility in the city, and energy savings
2. Transition to a green, healthy city:
a nature-inclusive and climate-adaptive city by 2050, planned and managed to increase biodiversity and make the city ‘rigorously’ green.
3. Transition to a circular economy reducing the social and environmental impact of our material use by achieving a 50% reduction in non-renewable raw materials by 2030 and 100% circularity by 2050.
 biodiverse, healthy 
A green, and climate adaptive city

[Page 30]
The transition to sustainable energy 
We are preparing the step towards a public district heating company for Amsterdam.

Our City of Tomorrow  Counsil Letter Sustainable Future

[Page 31]
transition
Our City of Tomorrow
Counsil Letter Sustainable Future
To combat climate change, we are aiming for a reduction in CO2 emissions of 60% by 2030 (compared to 1990) and 100% by 2050. This is in line with the planned amendment to the Climate Act. This reduction in CO2 emissions relates to energy consumption in the city. Environment and sustainability consultancy CE 
Delft has conducted research into how Amsterdam can reduce its CO2 emissions by 60% by 2030. The recommendations from the study will be developed in greater detail, tested for feasibility and translated into policy to the greatest extent possible. 
In addition to the intensification based on the study by CE Delft, we will take a number of important steps in the coming years:
 
•With our insulation offensive, we are committed to increasing the rate of insulation and accelerating the improvement of homes, investing unequally for equal opportunities. We are working on a subsidy scheme for residents on a low income whose home is poorly insulated. By providing customised financial advice, we will assist them in making use of this subsidy or other funding schemes for sustainability. We will also support homeowners’ associations by providing information, stimulus, advice, guidance, subsidies and financing. The City will help associations by means such as webinars, courses, network meetings, and neighbourhood and district meetings. The City will also offers free energy advice and guidance to homeowners’ associations via a designated helpdesk.
 
•Most historic buildings are not built according to contemporary sustainability standards. However, it is essential that we make built heritage more sustainable in order to ensure that the occupancy and hence the maintenance of historic buildings remains attractive in the future, even if energy costs increase. The Implementation 
Agenda for Sustainable Heritage focuses on supporting all residents and homeowners’ associations in Amsterdam who wish to make their homes more sustainable, and on facilitating corporations that want to accelerate their transition to sustainability. The focus therefore lies on services, communications and a balance between heritage value and sustainability. The Implementation Agenda relates to all built heritage in Amsterdam, with an emphasis on municipal monuments and listed buildings, because these lie within the municipal government’s sphere of policy influence.
 
•Tenders for land allocation allow us to set requirements for new buildings, with energy neutrality as a key principle. Developers can help to achieve our sustainability goals through an integrated approach. In Buiksloterham, for example, three energy-neutral blocks comprising 357 homes are being developed using circular materials. An energy-producing neighbourhood is to be built on Strandeiland, with a strong emphasis on self-sufficiency, circularity and nature inclusiveness.
 
•For social housing construction and transformation (demolition and new build), the municipal executive is dependent on the voluntary efforts of developers to achieve non-statutory sustainability performance. Ultimately, finances in area development are under pressure, which means that additional financial provisions are not currently feasible.

[Page 32]
transition
Our City of Tomorrow
Counsil Letter Sustainable Future 
•Following the example of a possible National Energy Savings 
Programme, we aim to develop an Energy Savings Action Plan, in which we will arrive at coherent energy-saving measures directed at neighbourhoods and economic sectors.
 
•We are preparing to create a public heating network company for Amsterdam in response to the proposed Collective Heating 
Act. This will not necessarily be a municipal heating network company. In 2024, we will develop a strategy and process to realise the company. In developing the strategy, the affordability of residents’ energy bills will be a key starting point.
 
•We will also broaden our approach to making the city gas-free to include new target groups and different heating technologies and sources, such as heat pumps, block heating and aquathermal energy. We will focus on heating systems that function on the basis of sustainable, future-proof heat sources such as heat from data centres, the sewer or the river IJ.
 
•The combined capacity of wind turbines within Amsterdam’s city limits will increase by around 18 MW during this administrative period, towards 127 MW in 2030.
 
•By the end of the administrative period, at least 350 MW of solar energy capacity will have been realised, on the way to the target of 550 
MW in 2030. We will continue our endeavours to have all suitable roofs used to generate solar power, and maintain our target-group-oriented approach to stimulate this, for example by means of customised advice. We are also committed to accelerating the installation of solar panels on large roofs. We are working on utilising the great potential of solar power in partnership with Port of Amsterdam. We also want to make use of the possibilities to make the use of roofs mandatory. Municipal land and car parks, as well as permanently or temporarily available land such as the new islands of Strandeiland and Buiteneiland, will be used for the generation of sustainable energy. In addition to the quantitative target for solar power, we are working on qualitative objectives such as promoting local ownership, combating energy poverty and stimulating circularity and innovation.
 
•Through our Sustainable Business Market programme, we help companies to become more energy efficient. Companies have their own responsibility to invest in sustainability. The City provides active support via a city-wide programme to make sustainability as easy as possible so everyone can participate. 
The City also conducts inspections and enforces regulations if companies fail to comply with sustainability requirements.
 
•The construction of major new energy infrastructure is necessary in the North Sea Canal area for hydrogen transport and supply, electricity supply, CO2 capture and storage, and steam and energy storage. In the coming years, we will be working on regional and national hydrogen infrastructure, electrolysis and the large-scale import of hydrogen. The waste processing and power generation company AEB also aims to have started large-scale CO2 capture and storage under the North Sea by 2026, capturing 480 kton of CO2 per year – almost 10% of all the city’s emissions. We are requesting funding from central government to boost and facilitate the energy transition, for example for new pipeline infrastructure for hydrogen and hydrogen carriers. We also call on central government (and the EU) to provide clear legislation and regulations to support and accelerate the energy transition.
Transitie - 1

[Page 33]
transition 
•In parts of the city, the energy transition and growth of the city are leading to congestion in the already heavily loaded power grid. The grid and infrastructure therefore also require expansion and a revision of processes. We are making agreements with grid operators to involve residents in the integration of electricity. To secure the power supply for societally relevant functions, also during periods of congestion, we are cooperating with the Interprovincial 
Consultative Body (Interprovinciaal Overleg), the Association of Dutch 
Municipalities (Vereniging Nederlandse Gemeenten), the Ministry of 
Economic Affairs and Climate Policy and the Netherlands Authority for Consumers and Markets (Autoriteit Consument en Markt) on a method for social and local prioritisation when allocating capacity.
Emission-free mobility
At the beginning of June 2023, the municipal executive adopted the Amsterdam Implementation Agenda for Zero-Emission Mobility 
2023-2026. Measures to which we are committed include:
 
•From 2025, zero-emission zones will apply to taxis, vans and lorries (within the A10 ring road), mopeds and scooters (within built-up areas) and pleasure craft (in the city centre). This means that vehicles newly registered as of 2025 (and recreational craft that have been purchased new) must be zero-emission in order to enter the zone. Transitional arrangements will apply to existing vehicles and vessels. The ambition is to establish a zero-emission zone within built-up areas for all types of traffic by 2030.
 
•In addition, we are concentrating on facilitation and stimulus measures such as the construction of public charging infrastructure. There are currently more than 3,000 public charging stations (comprising 6,000 charging points) and more than 30 public fast chargers in Amsterdam. 
Amsterdam is encouraging vehicle owners to switch to electric vehicles by providing zero-emission taxi stands and subsidies for scrapping fossil fuel vehicles. We are also launching an awareness campaign.

Our City of Tomorrow  Counsil Letter Sustainable Future

[Page 34]
The transition to a green and healthy city
We choose nature-inclusive, green, and biodiverse banks, quays, verges, parks, woodland and shrubbery, grasslands, plantations, streets, and squares.

Our City of Tomorrow  Counsil Letter Sustainable Future

[Page 35]
transition
Our City of Tomorrow
Counsil Letter Sustainable Future
Climate change impacts our infrastructure and the safety and quality of our living environment. It also seriously affects biodiversity, making parks and gardens even more important. Not only are trees and planting necessary for residents and animals, they also help to cool the city on hot days and to absorb water from heavy rainfall. 
Nature-inclusive building and development
In tenders commissioned by the City, we apply a points system for ‘nature-inclusive construction’. Tendering companies have to demonstrate how they will incorporate nature-inclusive solutions into their designs. 
The City takes this into account when assessing the proposals. An evaluation of this points system is now underway, and after the summer, recommendations will be submitted to the city council. Examples of recent tenders with a focus on sustainable material use and natureinclusive construction are Habitat Royale in the Zuidas district and Robin 
Wood on Centrumeiland.
From grey to green
The inclusion of trees and planting must become a matter of course in our development and management activities. The choice of planting and the planning and maintenance of public space must contribute to climate adaptation, biodiversity, social welfare and health. In each new neighbourhood plan, we are working to create a continuous green ecological structure with high biodiversity and a natural network of planting and watercourses. In constructing or remodelling public space, we are also opting for nature-inclusive, green and biodiverse canal sides, banks, roadsides, parks, woodland and shrubberies, grasslands, public gardens, streets and squares. Hard surfaces in existing public space will be transformed from grey to green, as with the asphalt in the Amsterdamse Bos. In the Rembrandtpark, we are deepening and reconstructing watercourses, replacing hard surfaces with greenery and constructing nature-friendly banks to increase the water-storage capacity. 
Less food waste
More sustainable consumption and production of food is also high on our list of priorities. To this end, we are currently developing a Food 
Strategy. We aim to cut food waste by 50% by 2030 compared to 
2015. This may include the introduction of compulsory measures for catering and shops, a move for which we are already exploring legal options. In addition, we are creating six food hubs in the city, which will bring together production, distribution of surplus food, food preparation and consumption.
Transitie - 2

[Page 36]
transitie
Green transition
Our City of Tomorrow
Counsil Letter Sustainable Future
Health
The World Health Organisation (WHO) describes the rapid warming of our climate as the greatest threat to public health of the 21st century [1]. 
The rising temperature brings health risks, including heat stress, increased 
UV radiation, more widespread tropical infectious diseases, a greater incidence of allergies, and global shortages of food and drinking water. 
As a city, we must anticipate these risks and adapt accordingly. Those in the most vulnerable situations are the most at risk of being affected and deserve the most attention.
Efforts to promote health are often aligned with efforts to mitigate climate change. A greener living environment and a reduction in our consumption of meat and dairy products bring benefits not only for human health, but also for animals and the planet. Given the relationship between climate and health, the Amsterdam public health service (GGD) is committed to promoting not only a healthier population, but also a healthier planet.
The health service has signed the Green Deal for Sustainable Care 3.0 and will link its expertise in the field of health to the climate challenge and actively work on reducing its own carbon footprint.
 
Article World Health Organisation (WHO): ' Climate change and health'
Transitie - 2

[Page 37]
The transition to a circular economy
If circular principles are well embedded in municipal policy, the impact will gradually permeate the city, step by step 
Our City of Tomorrow  Counsil Letter Sustainable Future

[Page 38]
In the transition to a circular economy, we are increasingly making the move from ‘doing circular things’ (chiefly pilots and visible activities at project level) to ‘doing things circularly’ (embedded in policy, work processes and procedures). During the term of this coalition, we apply circular principles where it really matters.
For example, we set circular requirements for the design of new schools via the framework contract in the tender. We plan to collect organic waste separately so less waste has to be incinerated. When policy is updated, circular principles are included. Our mobility policy focuses on preventing transport movements. And we will ensure that the municipal organisation is able to work according to circular principles by 2026. 
When this is complete, the City’s purchasing power of almost €3 billion per year will offer opportunities to circular companies to develop new products.
How we will make our economy circular
Amsterdam’s greatest ecological impact is caused by the use of materials and therefore takes place elsewhere, often in poor countries that have contributed the least to climate change. For the transition to a circular city, Amsterdam is therefore working on:
 
•Preventing the use of raw materials through design. For example, we will enable industry to start using treated wastewater, so it is no longer necessary to extract groundwater. Via the Plastic Smart City initiative, cafes and restaurants between Amstel station and the city hall will stop using disposable plastic on their terraces. And we will facilitate the textile sector in developing new solutions such as dyeing yarn without using water.
 
•Extending the life of products. For example, we provide structural support to recycling companies with a social quality mark and to repair centres in Amsterdam. And we apply the principle of ‘reuse, unless’ as standard in our approach to public space. Amsterdam will also encourage consumers not to pay for ownership, but for use, so that companies are given an incentive to make better appliances that last longer.
 
•Preventing waste by implementing a prevention plan aimed at avoiding single-use plastics and the unnecessary production of electrical appliances and mattresses, both by lobbying central government and through local action.
 
•The valorisation of waste streams (closing the loop). We process waste in a way that stimulates textile recycling so that it can be used to make new high-quality yarn. We are investing in improved waste collection so more organic residual flows are processed into compost and fertiliser. And in tenders issued by the City, we take into account what can happen to the materials after the use phase.
 
•Replacing fossil and mineral materials with renewable materials. For example, in 2025, at least 20% of new buildings will be constructed using timber. Existing examples are Juf Nienke in Sluisbuurt, Geins in Zuidoost, HAUT in Amstelkwartier, Poppies in Buiksloterham and 
Switi in Zuidoost.
 
•Encouraging housing corporations, homeowners’ associations and private owners to use biobased insulation materials in making homes 
Circular transition
Our City of Tomorrow
Counsil Letter Sustainable Future
Transitie - 3

[Page 39]
more sustainable. And by making protective clothing in hospitals out of washable materials, so items are not thrown away after a single use.
 
•Exploring how we can recover valuable raw materials in the water chain in pilots such as New Sanitation.
More intelligent production, less consumption
To achieve the required scale, we need to cooperate with the city’s residents, businesses and collectives. Our partners Port of Amsterdam and the North Sea Canal Area Environment Agency (Omgevingsdienst 
Noordzeekanaalgebied) are essential in this respect. In partnership with businesses and civil society organisations, we are developing a range of support possibilities to remove barriers and obstacles. For example, it is important that sufficient suitable physical space is made available in the right places in the city to enable the successful development of circular initiatives, such as collection and repair centres that make sustainable revenue models feasible. From 2024, Amsterdam will make capacity and resources available to advise and assist at least 100 businesses and/or initiatives annually in moving towards more circular operations or entrepreneurship. Actions like these are aimed at promoting more intelligent production and less consumption, and ultimately achieving a significant reduction in the impact of material use in the city.
Circular transition
Our City of Tomorrow
Counsil Letter Sustainable Future

[Page 40]
In conclusion
The climate, raw material and biodiversity crises demand our maximum commitment: we take responsibility for both the municipal organisation and the city to make every effort to keep our city and the world liveable. Our focus lies not just on CO2, but on all the targets we have set. We must take good care of the city, for now and for future generations, without losing sight of the most vulnerable groups. In all our plans for the coming years, we will continue to engage in dialogue with the city and remain transparent in the choices we make. We will work together. Together we will seek a balance between necessary, sometimes painful measures now and the severe consequences of climate change in the future. We will therefore continue regularly to inform the city council about the implementation of our sustainability transitions through our sustainability reports. 
We face a hard but honourable task. Let us all act now and ensure a sustainable future for our city of tomorrow.

Our City of Tomorrow  Counsil Letter Sustainable Future