[Page 1]
WORKING TOWARDS 
MORE RESILIENT CITIES 
With the ﬁnancial support of

[Page 2]
Within the United Nations system, 
UN-Habitat is the main agency working to make the growing number of cities in the world better places to live for all. 
UN-Habitat works with local, regional and national governments, non-governmental organisations, academia, the private sector, citizens, think tanks, and all other groups that can help make cities more sustainable and resilient. 
A resilient city assesses, plans and acts to prepare for and respond to all hazards – sudden and slow-onset, expected and unexpected.
We know that cities face a range of new and growing challenges, many of which are a result of our changing climate. From earthquakes to ﬂooding, cyberattacks to unemployment, epidemics to drought, cities must be prepared. 
To help make cities resilient, 
UN-Habitat has developed a robust tool—the City Resilience Proﬁling 
Tool—that local governments can use to identify risks and take actions to minimise the negative impact. 
Through the New Urban Agenda and Agenda 2030, 
UN Member States agreed on a number of targets and goals that outline an ambitious vision for the future in which poverty is eradicated, the planet is respected and we reduce the impact of natural and human-made hazards. UN-Habitat is leading local implementation for the achievement of global agreements.
UN-HABITAT
WORKING TOWARDS MORE 
RESILIENT CITIES 
From Yakutsk to Maputo, Port Vila to 
Asuncion, UN-Habitat works with cities across the world because all cities face challenges and all city inhabitants deserve to live in a safe place. uresiliencehub #UrbanResilience

[Page 3]
BUILDING SUSTAINABLE 
AND RESILIENT CITIES
Over half of the global population lives in cities and the number grows every day. 70% of the population is expected to live in cities by 2050.
Rapid urbanisation can cause demographic, environmental, economic and spatial challenges like overcrowding, water shortages, disease, and pollution… but urbanisation can help people escape poverty by providing jobs, access to clean water and sanitation, and innovation. 
Safeguarding human, economic and natural assets requires strong local administrations and empowered inhabitants to face new challenges.
Without the necessary investment to make cities resilient to things like climate change, 77 million urban residents risk falling back into poverty.
National government support to regional and local administrations is crucial to ensure that urbanisation happens in a resilient and sustainable way.
Building Resilient Cities forms part of a global eﬀort to create a safer and more sustainable planet: one of the United Nations’ 
17 Sustainable Development Goals.