[Page 1]
RESILIENT
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
2019 RESILIENT SEOUL | A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019

[Page 2]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
Smart Safe City for All, Seoul
Photo by An Yeon-soo

[Page 3]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019 
Introduction 
Executive Summary 
What is Urban Resilience? 
Introducing Seoul 
Seoul in Context 
Seoul’s History of Disasters 
Journey Towards Resilient Seoul 
100RC Network 
Goal 1 Governance- Resilience through Collaboration 
Program 1. Safety Governance
Program 2. Smart Safety Net
Program 3. Climate Change Response System
Program 4. Proactive Management for Aging Infrastructure
Program 5. Safer Neighborhoods
Goal 2 Community- Stronger and Connected Community 
Program 6. Connected Neighborhood for the Vulnerable
Program 7. Stable and Affordable Housing for All
Program 8. Childbirth and Childcare Service
Program 9. Innovative Solutions in Community
Goal 3 Inclusive Growth- Prosperous Seoul for All 
Program 10. Youth Welfare and Jobs
Program 11. Employment Opportunities for the Elderly
Program 12. Microbusiness and the Self-employed
Program 13. Respect for Labor
Program 14. Expansion of Social Economy
What’s Next? 
Acknowledgements

[Page 4]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
MAYOR'S
MESSAGE
More than half of the world’s population resides in urban areas. Not limited to just people, major infrastructure, including the economy, culture, transportation, education, and health, are also densely located in cities. Thus, strategic disaster risk reduction and response measures to adverse events are imperative. 
Due to the impacts of climate change, the characteristics of disasters have become more uncertain and extensive in scale. More than any other time in history, we need a paradigm shift in disaster preparedness.
The Sendai Framework, adopted at the Third UN 
World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction, recognizes the need for improved understanding of disaster risk, the strengthening of disaster risk governance, and the mobilization of risk-sensitive investment as a way of reducing disaster risk, and articulates regional resilience and enhancing support for the vulnerable. 
Seoul is a leading city that has addressed various urban problems stemming from rapid industrialization and urbanization. Yet, we still encounter safety challenges from climate change and aging infrastructure.
Placing citizens’ safety at the heart of our policy, Seoul is committed to building resilience that can prevent natural and social disasters and foster the capacity to recover quickly in times of crisis. In 2013, Seoul took part in the Making Cities Resilient campaign of the 
UNISDR. Also, we have been building resilience strategies since 2016, and the Deputy Mayor of Safety 
Management was designated as the Chief Resilience 
Officer of Seoul when Seoul was announced as one of the 100 Resilience Cities pioneered by the Rockefeller Foundation. Now we proudly present Resilient 
Seoul, which was built through extensive discussions with Seoulites and global partnership with cities around the world.
Resilient Seoul will prepare all Seoulites for urban challenges and ensure they have a safe and thriving city in the years ahead. To achieve this, both the public and private must cooperate in responding to potential threats, and integrated communities need to protect our vulnerable neighbors. Inclusive growth will ensure that every individual will prosper from economic development.
Resilient Seoul is only the beginning. Seoul’s blueprint is to take a giant leap toward the future. For only by striving together can we achieve a beautiful, energetic, and resilient city for our citizens.

[Page 5]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
100RC'S
MESSAGE
CRO'S
MESSAGE
Michael Berkowitz
President, 100 Resilient Cities
On behalf of the 100 Resilient Cities organization, 
I wanted to offer congratulations to the City of 
Seoul, my good friend Mayor Park, and Chief Resilience Officer Kim Hak-Jin on the release of the City’s first Urban Resilience Strategy. 
Seoul approached this work with the noble desire to make the city safer and to keep its citizens out of harm’s way. But as the Resilience and Safety office moved through the strategy process, collaborated with municipal bodies, consulted with communities and partnered with institutions; they came to a more comprehensive view of what it meant to make the city safe. No longer were they focused on solely on physical safety but on economic safety, on social safety, on health, welfare, inclusivity and connectivity. This document lays out a vision for a 
Smart, Safe City for All that seeks to enhance governance, restore community and promote inclusive growth. Through this vision, your great city has embraced resilience as the key to a safe and secure future for all Seoulites. 
This holistic approach to resilience builds on Seoul’s tradition of innovating progressive solutions to make the city more livable, healthier and safer. Solutions like Seoullo 7017 – a brilliant way to repurpose outdated infrastructure gave Seoul back a green heart and created a place that brings people together. 
This visionary strategy includes something for all of Seoul. Drawing on expertise and opportunities from all corners of the city government, it lays out protections for vulnerable workers, makes the city safer for women and mothers, creates opportunity for those over 50, and gives all citizens a louder voice with which to speak to the city government about their needs. 
With this roadmap of tangible actions, Seoul is poised to become a world leader in urban resilience. 
Seoul will carry the urban resilience movement forward with a continued commitment to teaching its neighbors as well as learning from them. As Seoul takes on the challenging work of bringing this vision to life, I invite you all to join the movement and be a part of making this city a smart, safe, welcoming home for all.
Modern society has experienced rapid urbanization, where politics, economy, community, and culture are centered on the urban area. A city with ongoing urbanization is redefined by technology-dependency and systemic complexity, not least by anonymity and rampant individualism.
Just like other metropolises around the globe, Seoul endures the threats and vulnerabilities of modern society. The roads, subways, power lines, water supply, and drainage system are tightly intertwined to sustain the lives of 640,000 buildings across Seoul, in which ten million Seoulites live together.
However, the possibility of large and small accidents and disasters is the other side of the convenient “always-on, always-connected” culture. Seeing marvelous development during its industrialization, 
Seoul is now endowed with the tasks to address the side effects of rapid urbanization. 
The dangerous condition of Seoul’s aging infrastructure sheds much-needed light on the potential threat of disasters, and globalization and climate change are bringing new urban challenges such as earthquakes and particulate matter.
With low fertility rates and an aging population, economic productivity is on the decline, and yet, promoting social safety nets to lift vulnerable groups—including children and the elderly—out of poverty has become our priority.
In light of undertaking the urban challenges we face, Resilient Seoul was developed through the 
100RC partnership, a process that involved Seoulites, experts, city government staff members, and private organizations.
It is my pleasure to thank 100 Resilient Cities, as well as the 100RC Singapore regional office, for guiding us in our evolutionary step toward Resilient Seoul.
As Chief Resilience Officer, I look forward to seeing Seoul become a more flexible, inclusive city well-prepared against disasters to build resilience now and in the future.
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019

[Page 6]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
Resilient Seoul was derived from a question: “What are the ways we can ensure the physical, social, and economic stability and safety of our city and its citizens?” The bold initiative we are about to present will answer the inquiry by articulating challenges that are becoming more intertwined and complicated to solve within the City of Seoul, home of ten million Seoulites. 
This strategy was constructed through a different approach from Seoul’s existing policies. Accompanied by 100 Resilience Cities (100RC), pioneered by the Rockefeller Foundation, Resilient Seoul is the culmination of work with cities around the globe that have similar urban challenges and best practices for overcoming the problems. Resilient Seoul lays the groundwork for collective action, giving a voice to diverse stakeholders—across city departments, private organizations, and citizens—throughout the entire process. The value in building resilience was our utmost priority, from which the challenges of the city, the diagnoses, as well as solutions were strategized accordingly.
Seoul has accomplished economic development unprecedented in world history, yet the current situation we face does not look good. The economy has entered a new slowdown, and changes in the natural and social environment are escalating new conflicts within the city. 
The shocks and stresses that Seoul is faced with range from economic concerns such as a recession or spiking unemployment rates to the record-high fine dust level that recently struck people.
We hope to see a Seoul in which all Seoulites will thrive and be safe from diverse urban threats. Recognizing the importance of public-private partnerships in tackling newly emerging challenges, the city is committed to working across all departments and partners. We will also pursue system-wide efforts to restore the community spirit, leaving no Seoulite behind by building more connected neighborhoods. To ensure that this happens, equitable and sustainable economic growth must be encouraged as resilient Seoul brings prosperity to its people. 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Oil Tank Culture Park
Once abandoned Oil Depot Base was reborn as an environment-friendly cultural facility.

[Page 7]
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
GOAL 1
GOAL 3
Governance:
Resilience through 
Collaboration
Inclusive Growth:
Prosperous Seoul for All
Direction
Resilient growth
Inclusive and equitable city
More opportunities for the vulnerable
Challenge
Disparity
Unfair employment opportunities
Mitigate greenhouse gas emissions
Reach the target of the Paris Agreement to lower greenhouse gas emissions and transform into a hub of green energy.
Reduce fine dust
Secure Seoulites’ right to breathe clean air under the three principles: mitigation, public health, governance
Expand public preschools
Increase social responsibility and emphasize the role of nurturing infants and children who most need the care services within each district.
Broaden childbirth and childcare support
Implement social and structural supports before, during, and after childbirth and facilitate services for low-income and high-risks mothers and infants to address low-fertility crisis.
Widen the social safety net for microbusinesses
Microbusinesses will enjoy sustainable business environment.
Encourage using Zero-Pay
Reduced commission fees for all affiliated stores of Zero-Pay will lower burdens for the consumers and the stores.
Improve safety information and early response system
Streamline report system for a better disaster responsiveness using smart technology.
Expand citizen-led safety platform
Place citizens at the core in facilitating safety-related policies and budgeting process, and continuously monitor the follow-up management.
Strengthen social safety net in all neighborhoods
Any policy blind spot will be eliminated by fostering care service led by residents for our vulnerable neighbors who are at the heart of welfare service.
Realize Seoul-specific youth welfare system
Strengthen welfare system specifically for the resilience of youth.
Develop New Deal Job to create private job opportunities
Connect youth and excellent enterprises for high-quality job opportunities.
Promote crime prevention through environmental design (CPTED)
Lower the cost in addressing social problems and provide residents more access in discussing local challenges.
Build safer neighborhoods for women
Design initiatives to end violence against women and create safer environment for women.
Support Social Enterprises and 
Cooperatives
Expand the scope of Social Impact Bond project and promote youth participation to social issues.
Forecast aging infrastructure and integrate safety management system
Separately managed underground facilities will be controlled by the City and evaluated through a big-data analysis.
Strengthen real-time monitoring system for infrastructure
Facilities will be linked to the Real-time 
Monitoring Center to enhance the disaster preparedness in times of crisis.
Operate “Local Labs” to foster innovative solutions
Discuss regional problems in partnership with residents, civil servants, experts, and regional businesses and draw joint solutions.
Boost PPPs for the sharing economy
Diverge from public-focused sharing policies towards private-involved sharing culture to boost partnerships among various stakeholders.
Guarantee the rights of vulnerable workers
Create a labor environment where all workers’ efforts will be paid off.
Create a big-data driven smart safe city
The smart technology based Data Center and Big-data Storage for the public data will enhance citizens’ access to the integrated city data.
Build smart CCTV network for the safety of civilians
AI-embedded CCTVs will be directly incorporated with the Smart Seoul CCTV Safety 
Center to prevent and detect all types of crimes and disasters 24/7.
Expand housing support for the vulnerable populations
Affordable and safe housing will be provided to encourage independence and social integration of the housing marginalized.
Enable citizen-customized housing welfare
Marginalized neighborhoods will benefit from the housing regeneration project led by resident-community.
Expand more opportunities for the Elderly
For the middle-aged and elderly who are already retired but still willing to contribute to the economy, reemployment options will be available.
Climate Change Response 
System
Childbirth and Childcare 
Service
Microbusiness and the 
Self-employed
Safety Governance
Connected Neighborhood for the Vulnerable
Youth Welfare and Jobs
Safer Neighborhoods
Expansion of Social Economy
Proactive Management for 
Aging Infrastructure
Innovative Solutions in 
Community
Respect for Labor
Smart Safety Net
Program 3 
Program 1 
Program 5
Program 4 
Program 2 
Program 8
Program 6
Program 9
Program 7
Program 12 
Program 10 
Program 14
Program 13 
Program 11 
Stable Housing for the 
Vulnerable
Employment Opportunities for the Elderly
GOAL 2
Community: 
Stronger and Connected 
Community
Direction
No more policy blind spots
Community integration
Warm caring city for the vulnerable
Social cohesion
Challenge
Demographic and family structural changes
Inter-generational conflicts
Disconnected communities
Vision-Smart Safe City for All, Seoul
Direction
Risk recognition
Proactive management
Cleaner air
Integrated solutions
Challenge
Lack of understanding of risks
Siloed approaches
Embracing new technologies | RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019

[Page 8]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019 충격 또는 스트레스
Progress
Time
Shock or Stress
A Resilient
City
Path of
Development
The core challenge from the urban resilience context can be explained in two categories. First is the problem that arises persistently and affects the citizens for the longer-term; for example, economic downturns, unemployment, and demographic changes such as low fertility and aging. Challenges that continue over a long period of time are defined as chronic stresses.
On the other hand, sharp events that are sudden and unexpected, including natural disasters -storms, heavy rainfalls, heat waves, earthquakes, and fires- and the collapse of infrastructure facilities are referred to as acute shocks.
The impact of these shocks and stresses range from causing inconveniences to threatening lives. The implications may cast a dim outlook on not just individual citizens but to communities and even the City in its entirety. The priority and severity of shocks and stresses can be perceived differently depending on the conditions of the city and its people. Once thought to affect certain groups of people, fine dust has now become a critical determinant of our health and survival.
Urban resilience is the capability of all entities within a city, including individuals, communities, institutions, and businesses, to survive, adapt, and grow no matter what kinds of chronic stresses and acute shocks they experience. In a resilient city, all the entities can quickly go back to the normal condition or even be better in the face of challenges. Its level of resilience determines how the city can withstand and emerge stronger from the impact of the crises.
By investing in initiatives and projects that anticipate, respond, and recover the risks of damage caused by the physical, social, and economic problem, a city builds its resilience, and its competitiveness is enhanced. Furthermore, a forward-looking and integrated decision of the city will provide a tremendous amount of benefit to its people.
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
What is Urban 
Resilience?
Seoul Botanic Park
The first urban-style botanic garden of Seoul.

[Page 9]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
H e a lt h & 
W e ll b e i n g
L e a d e r s h i p & 
S t r a t e g y
Fo ste rs 
Lo ng
-T er m &
In te gr at ed Pl an ni ng
Em po wer s a 
Bro ad 
Ra ng e of 
Sta ke ho ld er s
Pro m ote s L ea de rsh ip &
Eff ect ive M an ag em en t
Me et s B asi c N ee ds
Su pp orts Li vel ih oo ds &
E mp lo ym en t
En su re 
Pu bli c
He alt h 
Se rv ic es
I n fr a s t r u c t u r e & 
E n v ir o n m e n t
Cri tic al 
Se rvi ce s
En sur es 
Co nti nu ity of
Co mm uni cat ion & 
Mo bili ty
Pr ov id es 
Re lia ble & M an ma de A sse ts
Pro vid es & En han ces Na tur al
Se cu rit y & Ju stic e
En sur es 
So cia l St abi lity ,
Pr os pe rit y
Fo ste rs 
Ec on om ic
En ga ge d C om mu nit ies
Pro mo tes C oh esi ve & 
E c o n o m y & 
S o c i e t y
The City
Resilience Framework provides 12 drivers necessary for a city’s resilience.
Multimodal Transport
System
Public Transportation
Information and
Communication 
Networks
Contingency
Information System
Collective Identity
Inclusive Local Cultural 
Heritage
Social Networks
Enhance Natural and
Man-made Resources
Flood Risk Management
Contingency Plans
Ecosystem Management
Deterrents to Crime
Fair and Transparent Policing
Enforcement of Laws
Education
Communication Between the Government and Public
Knowledge Transfer
Appropriate Monitoring
Fair Labor Policy
Skills and Training
Livelihood Opportunities
Development and Innovation
Access to Business Investment and 
Social Welfare
Environmental Policy
Protective Natural and
Man-made Assets
Diverse Revenue Streams
Business Investment
Regional Economy
Contingency Plans
City Strategies and Plans
Sectoral Plans
Shelter
Energy
Water
Food
Cross-sector
Communication
Strong Leadership
Evidenced-based
Decision-Making
Access to Public 
Healthcare and 
Emergency Services
Medical Practitioners and Plans
100 Resilient Cities (100RC), founded by the Rockefeller 
Foundation, launched a project to help cities around the world become more resilient to the physical, social, and economic challenges. Over the course of six years since 
2013, one-hundred cities around the world have been selected to address shocks and stresses by building up their resilience. In 2016, Seoul was announced as one of the global 100 cities and has been developing its Resilience 
Strategy since then.
The City Resilience Framework (CRF), developed by Arup and The Rockefeller Foundation, provides a methodology to understand the complexity of a city and confront the challenges and opportunities. Within the framework, the essential system of a city consists of four dimensions which are identified by 12 drivers and 50 dimensions across the areas of 1) Health and Wellbeing for livelihoods of people 
2) Economy and Society to foster prosperity and growth, 
3) Infrastructure and Environment that provides reliable mobility and critical services, and 4) Leadership and Strategy for effective decision making among a broad range of stakeholders. Therefore, it is noticeable that shocks and stresses are not limited to just physical disasters but also a myriad of matters from individuals’ mental stability to social cohesion, and even economic concerns within the community where citizens interact with each other.
What is Urban resilience?
Deoksugung Palace
One of five royal palaces remained in Seoul. The name means “Palace of virtue and longevity.”

[Page 10]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019 the 1986 10th 
Asian Games the 1988 24th 
Seoul Olympics the 2002 17th
FIFA World Cup the 2010 5th G20 
Seoul Summit
As a rising global city, located in the center of Northeast 
Asia near Tokyo, Beijing, Hong Kong, and Singapore, Seoul is one of the most thriving cities in the world – over the past six decades, its population quintupled and its GDP increased by 330 times. Its unprecedented economic growth underlined its emergence from the ashes of the Korean War and its transformation into the world’s 4th largest metropolitan economy in 2014.
Referred to as a source of growth and a financial hub, Seoul was ranked 15th in the list of “Overall 2025 City Competitiveness” by the Economist Intelligent Unit in 2013. For the six consecutive years, Seoul ranked sixth in the Global Power City Index since 2012.
As a magnet of opportunity for businesses and finance, 
Seoul produced 22% of Korea’s GDP as of 2014, and its economy is considered diversified and robust. Seoul is the hotspot of international gatherings to bring individuals from around the world, encouraging their participation.
Located in the central part of the Korean Peninsula where the Han River flows, Seoul has served as the capital for over 600 years and boasts a rich culture and fascinating history of more than 2000 years. As the most populous city of Korea, with an area of 605 square kilometers and an estimated population of more than ten million residents, Seoul is strategically positioned along the Han River and surrounded by a mountainous landscape. 
Introducing Seoul
Gyeongbokgung Palace
The first and the largest of the royal palaces built during the Joseon Dynasty.

[Page 11]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
3. Area 605.23㎢ (25 districts, 467 community centers)
4. Median age: 41.6years ( youth↓, elderly↑)
2. Population Density 16,728 people per ㎢ 
5. Employment Status
54%
Female Labor 
Force
Participation
60.2%
Employment ● Public library: ● Foreign visitors: 9.85million people → 10.51million people ● Women registered for Safety Scout service 31,587 → 322,704 ● Area of public sports facility per 1 citizen: 1.25㎡ → 1.36㎡ ● Share of social welfare budget ● Public childcare center: ● Public rental housing rate
6.1%
7.3%
867 → 1,691units ● Jobs created: 246,074 → 344,991
134 → 155units
6.285 trillion KRW 
8.735 trillion KRW
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019 | Resilient SEOUL | 
238,239 TOE (2013) → 
316,806 TOE (2016)
8. Income per capita 20,814,000 KRW (2016)
9. Gross Regional Domestic Product (GRDP) 357 trillion KRW
85.8 years 
10. Production of renewable energy: 
Population
10,124,579
Non-Koreans 
267,153
Koreans
9,857,426
1. Population male female
80.1 years 
6. Average life expectancy
RESILIENT SEOUL 
Statistics of Seoul (as of 2017)
Seoul in Context
155.2 → 169.3units
4.5%
Unemployment
7. General Index (2013 → 2017) ● Medical care facility for every 100,000 people:

[Page 12]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
90s
Oct. 1994
Sept. 2010
Feb. 2019
May 2015
Dec. 1994
Jul. 2011
Feb. 2016
May 2016
Nov. 2018
Jun. 1995
Feb. 2014
May 2016
Jan. 2018
Dec. 2018
Collapse of Seongsu Bridge
32 deaths
Ah-Hyeon gas explosion
Inattentiveness
Collapse of Sampoong Department Store
502 deaths
Flooding in Gwanghwamun
Unprecedented flood caused by heavy rainfall
Sunken road
Since 2010, due to aging underground facility, a total of 4,865 cases of sunken roads occurred until 2016
Fine dust level reaching the “worst”
Fine dust levels soar to “Worst” level for 7 consecutive days
11 days(2015) →13 days(2016) →20 days(2017)
Scorching heatwaves
Heatwave caused record deaths
Lonely deaths
Increase in lonely deaths among single-person households
Landslides on Mt. Woo-myun
Climate change-induced disaster → 16 deaths, 50 injured (112mm of rainfall, max. 447mm per day)
Suicide of a family in poverty
A mother and her two daughters suffering from financial hardships committed suicide
MERS outbreak
38 deaths, 186 infected (fatality rate: 20%)
Corrosion of tendons in the Jeongneungcheon Overpass
New types accident from aging bridges
Murder at Gangnam Station
Misogynistic violence, mental disorder problem, vulnerability of unisex public bathrooms
Death of subway workers at Guui Station
Outsourcing of dangerous tasks
Arson at a motel in Jongno
6 deaths, 4 injured
Collapse of KT Communications network
Network access temporarily paralyzed
Ruptured underground heat pipe in Mok-dong
Aging infrastructure; leakage caused by corrosion, leaving 1,822 households without heat or hot water
After 2000
After 2010
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
Seoul’s History of 
Disasters

[Page 13]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
The Strategy development process is set up according to the 
100RC guidance and the City Resilience Framework to enhance a city’s ability to be resilient in the face of adversity. The strategy process is composed of three life cycle phases, which begins with the Initiation, followed by the Strategy Development Process, and finally the implementation.
For the Strategy Development, we diagnosed Seoul’s shocks and stresses and evaluated its strengths, weaknesses, and potential opportunities. Through this procedure, we were able to draw the major challenges that we need to delve more deeply into the resilience perspectives. The step was prepared in two parts. 
As a first step of the resilience building process, we identified where Seoul stands in terms of the urban resilience. Started in January 2017 along with the formation of the Seoul Resilience Team, this course of action took about a year until the release of Preliminary Resilience Assessment in January 2018. 
For Phase I, we brought together voices of Seoulites through 
Citizen Forum, Foreign Citizen Forum, Civil Complaint Analysis, 100RC Agenda Setting Workshop, Citizen Questionnaire 
Survey, Public Contest Policy Proposal, and diverse channels to understand the background knowledge on location, environment, and history, and to analyze shocks and stresses that 
Seoul faces. 
Resilient Planning 
Development Process
Vice-Mayor I
For Administrative
Affairs
Vice-Mayor II
For Administrative
Affairs
CRO
Seoul Resilience
Team
Relevant Departments
Vice-Mayor
For Political Affairs
100RC
Steering
Committee
Experts
Mayor
Citizens of Seoul
Phase I
Pre-Strategy
Phase II
Phase III
Implementation
Strategy
Development
Diagnosis
6month
13month
18month
1~10Year
2016.05 
2016.12 
2018.03 
2019.09
After being selected as a part of the 100 Resilient Cities by the 
Rockefeller Foundation in 2016, Seoul has embarked on developing the Seoul Resilience Strategy. Out of diverse shocks and stresses that Seoul is faced with, selecting major areas through resilience lens was not an easy task. We needed a chief of staff to control this project across a variety of departments within the Seoul Metropolitan Government. According to the 100RC’s operation tools, Seoul designated the Chief 
Resilience Officer (CRO) who would lead the Seoul Resilience 
Team to assemble multiple stakeholders to lead the city’s resilience efforts. 
The stakeholders in the city network are essential assets that invigorate Seoul’s resilience. In line with the resilience efforts, we organized the Resilience Steering Committee to guide us through our way towards Seoul’s resilience. Nearly all stakeholders at every level from private organizations came together in cross-cutting working groups to discuss and develop new initiatives for Resilient Seoul. Lastly, we were able to form the Seoul Resilience Team to assist the CRO and to leverage our strength to chart hands-on resilience solutions for Seoulites. The final decision-making authorities are the Mayor, the 
Vice-Mayor, and the CRO of Seoul. The CRO, assisted by the 
Seoul Resilience Team, is responsible for decision making, restoring resilience, funding, and administrative work. The layout below presents the system for Seoul’s resilience journey.
Journey Towards 
Resilient Seoul

[Page 14]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
1_ Listening to Seoulites’ Voice ● Citizen Forum (DEC 2016) 200 safety experts, citizens.
● Civil Complaint Analysis (2015-2016) Based on 20,000 complaints filed ● Citizen Questionnaire Survey (JAN-FEB 2017) ● Public Contest Policy Proposal (NOV 2016- JAN 2017) ● 100RC Agenda Setting Workshop (FEB 2017) Attended by 500 people including 100RC, experts, civil servants, Seoulites.
● Foreign Citizen Forum (DEC 2016) Seoulites including non-Korean residents.
● PRA Report (JAN 2018) ● SOW & DA Report (JUN 2018)
Phase II began in March 2018, for the purpose of discovering Seoul’s Resilience Strategy and designing our Resilience Plan. Based on the outcomes of Phase 
I, we were able to examine Seoul’s overall resilience, followed by a deep analysis of vulnerable areas and the process of identifying Discovery Areas for Strategy 
Development Process of Seoul.
After the Discovery Areas had been finalized, the working-level group was formed to suggest a new approach for enhancing the resilience of Seoul. In-depth 
Resilient Planning 
Development Process studies were conducted in working-level meetings, 
Steering Committee workshops, and advisory meetings. Through these gatherings, diagnostic questions were identified and the areas of policy which needed to be reviewed were discovered. We explored the areas that need our closer attention by discovering diagnostic questions and reviewing the current state of 
Seoul’s policies to help us shape our vision for Resilient 
Seoul. Centered on the resilience value, this process coped with diverse areas, on which our Resilience Vision and Hierarchy were built.
Resilient Seoul
Phase II Scope of Work
Final draft
Resilient Seoul
Discovery Area 
Diagnostic Report
DRAFT ● Seoul Resilience Working Level Team formed (JUN 2018) ● Consultation and Strategy developed (AUG-DEC 2018) ● Steering Committee workshops (OCT 2018 & FEB 2019)
Journey Towards Resilient Seoul

[Page 15]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
Besides the survey, open dialogues on the urban threats took place. About 20,000 civil complaints filed through the Seoul Proposal Integrated Services “Eungdapso” were analyzed to prioritize risks and inconveniences felt by Seoulites in their daily lives. 
Resilient Planning 
Development Process
We identified and selected major shocks and stresses from the diagnosis in Phase I through the voices of civil servants, experts, and the Resilience Steering 
Committee from workshops, forums, and surveys attended by various stakeholders. Evaluating what we have heard from Seoulites allowed us to take instrumental approaches to building urban resilience. 
Through the course of reflecting people’s ideas, we 
On February 21st, 2017, the Agenda Setting Workshop was held to welcome Mayor Park, 100RC staff, civil servants, experts, relevant private organizations, civil society, and college students to talk about urban resilience. Attendees at the workshop prioritized Seoul’s major shocks and stresses through discussions and consultations. ▲ Diverse answers were derived from open discussions by non-Korean residents.
…more safety education programs for non-Koreans …to address problems caused from unisex public toilets …stricter rules applied to reckless bus driving …a strong clampdown on driving under inﬂuence …stronger enforcement of trafﬁc laws …safer walkways for pedestrians …transparent emergency information to foreigners …more respect for cultural diversity …broader policy to address problems related to the homeless …response measures for sexual harassment …to know whether we are safe from rising tensions with North Korea …more information in diverse languages …to say NO to motorcycles on the walkways
We need…
Severity
Risk
Flood
Landslide
Amusement facilities accidents
Noxious birds & Insects
Bicycle accidents
Plants epidemic
Volcano
Lightning
Draught
Cold wave
Heavy snow
Climbing
Electric shock
Drowning
Falling
Hail
Stampede crush
Wildﬁres
Ship accident
Food Poisoning
Elevator accidents
Terrorist Attack
Explosion
Earthquake
Burglary 
Typhoon
Radioactivity
Health service
Cyber attack
Public transportation
Arson
Water supply
Water pollution
Energy supply
Road trafﬁc accident
Air pollution
Epidemic
Ground subsidence
Subway accident
Yellow dust
Urban ﬁre
Violence
Collapse
Robbery, homicide
Sexual Violence
Distribution system
Green tide
Toxic substance
Soil Pollution
Epizootic
Aircraft
Government Ofﬁce Building Shutdown
Riot and Social disturbance
Soil Pollution
Heat wave
Hazardous materials came across a wide range of urban concerns in both gravity and severity. Selected urgent threats that are high in both risk and priority include crimes – sexual violence, robbery, violence, homicide - air pollution and fine dust, epidemics, building collapses, fires, subway accidents, and cyber-attacks. Seoulites are more sensitive about social issues that are connected to their daily lives.
▲ The graph shows how people perceive types of emergency by the level of risk and importance
2_ Identifying Seoul’s Shocks and Stresses
Journey Towards Resilient Seoul
As non-Koreans living in Seoul might have entirely different ways of viewing issues in Seoul, a forum for Seoulites from different countries was launched to identify demands that they have on the City.
LARGE FIRES
FINE DUST
AGING INFRASTRUCTURE
EARTHQUAKE
TRAFFIC
ACCIDENTS EPIDEMIC
SUNKEN ROADS
SUBWAY SAFETY
CONSTRUCTION SITES
LARGE-SCALE BUILDINGS
FLOOD&STORM DAMAGE
LABOR SAFETY
CYBER SECURITY
TOXIC MATERIALS
LIVING ENVIRONMENT
CRIME 자연재해가 결국 사회재난과 연결되어 있다고 생각해요. 자연재난은 전국적 논의이고, 사회재난에 집중했으면 좋겠어요” 
-11팀 문◦◦ “ 사람들이 사회재난을 가볍게 생각하는 이유 중 하나가 자신이 신경만 쓴다면 통제가 가능하다고 생각하기 때문입니다” 
-10팀 김◦◦ “ “Natural disaster are ultimately linked to social challenges.”
-Moon “People take social issues very lightly as they think the slight attention will keep them under control.
Very different attitude from natural disasters.”

[Page 16]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
Resilient Planning 
Development Process
Air Pollution
Epidemic
Radioactivity
Economic Crisis
Aging Infrastructure
Violent Crime
Earthquake
Urban Fire
Flood stress
Unemployment
Job Insecurity
Income Disparity
Demographic Change
Climate Change
Lack of Social Safety Net
Safety Inattentiveness
Housing Insecurity
Vulnerability shocks stresses
The first aspect that Seoulites highlighted as one of the major shocks is air pollution, as they are especially concerned for fine dust and particulate matter. 
Seoulites marked air pollution not just as an acute shock but also as one of Seoul’s chronic stresses that hamper people’s rights to breathe clean air. Following air pollution, pandemics, radiation exposure, economic and financial crises, aging infrastructure, crimes, earthquakes, and other aspects were also selected as Seoul’s main shocks. In particular, air pollution, nuclear disasters and radiation exposure caused by earthquakes, and aging infrastructure are all new challenges for Seoul. It is noticeable that these risks are identified predominantly over conventional challenges including car accidents, fires, and storms. 
As for the chronic stresses, economic challenges were chosen as the most critical problem. Jobless rates among youths and seniors are continuously rising. Most job openings are irregular positions, which are less paid and treated unequally than regular workers. The participants also addressed the income disparity between large corporations and 
SMEs, as well as prevalent income inequality and the widened gap between the rich and the poor.
The aging populations were also listed as the major sources of stress. A young participant mentioned that financially supporting one’s own parents is becoming more of a burden for young generations, whereas a senior attendee addressed the limited number of job openings for the elderly. A smaller economically active workforce means less room for growth potential, which requires our actions. Aside from these, corruption and governmental malpractice, climate change, air pollution, and aging infrastructure were also highlighted as major stresses of Seoul.
2_ Identifying Seoul’s Shocks and Stresses
Journey Towards Resilient Seoul
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019

[Page 17]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
Seoul Resilience Team distinguished several challenges against the shocks and the stresses of Seoul in order to build our strengths and define the future of Seoul.
 Newly Emerging Urban Threats 
Air quality problems represented by fine dust, possible radioactivity leaks from earthquakes, and other threats caused by aging infrastructure and facilities have gained tractions nowadays. What these matters have in common is that both the city government and the private sectors have little experience dealing with them, whereas they are making headlines recently, raising public uncertainties. This calls for proactive measures from the central and the local government. Seoul’s persistent and prolonged challenges have evolved with changes in the natural and social environment, creating entirely new challenges.
As climate change engenders extreme weather conditions like heavy downpours, heat waves, cold waves, and temperature anomalies, more and more voices have been raised for climate action. In terms of social issues, Seoul has one of the lowest crime rates 
Resilient Planning 
Development Process in the modern world; however, the level of anxiety about crime is distinctively high among the socially vulnerable populations including women, children, and elderly. Advanced IT technology speeds up the spread of illegal video content from spy cameras and crimes related to online distribution. Although these challenges have been identified relatively recently, they are evaluated urgent and serious. The city government and the people of Seoul have little experience with newly emerging threats than the conventional urban challenges, thus we need active and promising solutions for the years ahead.
 Addressing Economic Inequality 
Economic concerns are a major contributor to Seoul’s stresses, enough to compete against physical disasters. 
Going into detail, spiking unemployment rates, scarce affordable housing, social polarization, and inequitable social structure are problems to solve. Seoul has long been pushing forward diverse initiatives in discovering its growth potential, creating more jobs, providing affordable public housing, and securing workers’ safety net. However, economic problems being selected as one of the major shocks and stresses of Seoul implies 
Resilience scope
Goal 2.
Goal 3.
Housing
Labor Policy
Livelihood Support
Community Connection
Community Participation
Crime Prevention
City Assets Management
Emergency Information
System
Government-Citizen
Communication
Risk Detection and
Report System
Public Awareness of
Urban Threats
City Monitoring and
Data Management
New Urban
Threats
Economic
Concerns
Urban Challenge
Embrace and empower citizens
Utilize Smart
Technology
Care for vulnerable neighbors
Address economic inequality and polarization
Resilience Goal
Change in
Population and household structures
Health and
Wellness
Economy and
Society
Infrastructure and
Environment
Leadership and
Strategy
Goal 1.
Resilience
Through
Governance
Stronger &
Connected
Community
Prosperity
Through
Inclusive Growth
3_ Understanding Seoul’s Resilience Challenges
Journey Towards Resilient Seoul demographic and family structural changes play a central role in social perspectives. As social disintegration has accelerated, more vulnerable people are pushed further off a cliff. Thus, actions must be drawn to restore local communities that aim to include all marginalized residents and to eliminate any policy blind spots.
 Resilience Challenges
The approach through the resilience lens to address 
Seoul’s shocks and stresses will allow us to see innovative solutions and opportunities. Individual problem solving as well as empowering citizens’ capacity will also be achieved through this process. Based on the resilience work, Seoul will continue to find ways to adapt to and survive ever-changing urban problems in the longerterm. To approach Seoul’s obstacles in the resilience perspective, we utilized the City Resilience Framework by 100RC to identify blind spots in Seoul’s current policies. We overviewed Seoul’s current policy trends and evaluated its resilience capacity. The chart below lists susceptible areas out of the 50 dimensions of the 
CRF that need to be improved. The assessment builds upon four main areas to improve that needed to be addressed in defining the future of Seoul.
that the efforts of the City are not fully incorporated into people lives.
 Demographic & Family Structural Changes
Low fertility rates, aging society, and the rise of singleperson households demonstrate that Seoul is undergoing a demographic and family structural transformation. 
Though aging society alone was selected as Seoul’s major stresses, we need to bear in mind that demographic and family structural changes are closely linked to crimes, suicide, and other socio-economic inequalities which plague Seoul. Inter-generational tensions arise due to the gap in housing and job opportunities between youth and elderly. Increasingly, social disintegration is aggravated, and the local community is weakened. 
Joined by the demographic shifts and changes in the family structure, these arise as a new urban dilemma. 
An increasing number of single woman households and elderly single households are related to crimes against women and lonely deaths, respectively. Seoul is known to be a powerhouse for online interconnectivity, however, person-to-person ties have dwindled, and our neighbors have become potential assailants. If climate change is the key factor in terms of environment,

[Page 18]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
Embracing and empowering citizens
Over the past years, policies spearheaded by the City were mostly government-led, leaving out civic participation and citizen empowerment. Educating people to swiftly respond in the face of emergency and raising awareness for safety are the most effective way of disaster preparedness. Thus, ICT from the private sectors and their capacity must be appropriately employed in developing a forecast, warning, and report system for the clear delivery of information when a disaster occurs. 
Resilient Planning 
Development Process
Caring for vulnerable neighbors within each district
Soaring housing prices have placed enormous burdens on those living in underserved neighborhoods that are more likely to be exposed to unsafe housing environment. With a rising number of single-person households and elderly population, and social disintegration, our social safety net has weakened. 
Thus, the economically disadvantaged are becoming more susceptible to natural and social threats, indicating that welfare solutions must be embrace more citizens. To address this challenge, Seoul has been providing welfare that covers a wider range of people and focuses more on each individual’s circumstances. Not only fostering the government-led welfare system but creating vibrant neighborhoods where residents look after each other is also our goal. We seek to place the people at the center of care service so that all entities within Seoul’s neighborhoods will thrive and flourish. 
Utilizing Smart Technology
Smart Technology provides an efficient way of utilizing city’s resources based on the analysis of accumulated data using ICT. Smart Technology is gaining much more attention as a new tool to address urban challenges and improve the well-being and quality of people’s lives. Seoul has been adopting and applying Smart Technology faster than any other cities in the world. However, a comprehensive plan to integrate almost all city data beyond just public-private partnerships will be crucial. As managing the aging infrastructures and the disaster forecasting system are notable examples of its adoption, we will explore how 
Smart Technology can be employed in building a more resilient future of Seoul.
Resolving economic inequality and polarization
Economic polarization has intensified significantly, and the benefits of economic growth are not fairly distributed for all. Outsourcing and subcontracting out the dangerous tasks left labor workers vulnerable, creating a new term “outsourcing of danger,” forcing labor workers to risk their lives. More people demand to change the work culture of ‘gapjil,’ a word describing the imperious sense of entitlement that authority figures feel over their employees. Establishing a policy to create a discrimination-free society where labor is respected will be needed.
4_ Meeting Seoul’s Key Challenges
Journey Towards Resilient Seoul
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019

[Page 19]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
SMART SAFE CITY FOR ALL, SEOUL
Goal 1 : Govemance
Goal 2 : Community
Goal 3 : Inclusive growth
Vision
New Disasters
- Large-Scale Complex Disaster
- Earthquake, Aging Infrastructure
- Fine Dust, Global Warming
- Demographic changes(lowfertility rate, aging society, Multiculturalism)
- Social Disintegration
- Weakened social safety net (lonely deaths)
- Economic Downturn
- Unemployment, Unstable employment
- Polarization
- Extreme Heatwaves, Cold waves
- All Sorts of Crimes
Conventional Disaster
Social Issues
Economic Disaster
Goal
Program
Major
Shocks &
Stresses
1. Safety Governance
2. Smart Safety Net
3. Climate Change 
Response System
4. Proactive Management for Aging Infrastructure
5. Safer Neighborhoods
6. Connected 
Neighborhood for the Vulnerable
7. Stable and Affordable 
Housing for All
8. Childbirth and 
Childcare Service
9. Innovative Solutions in Community
10. Youth Welfare and Jobs 11. Employment Opportunities for the Elderly 12. Microbusiness and the Self-Employed 13. Respect for Labor 14. Expansion of Social Economy
Resilience through
Collaboration
Stronger & Connected
Community
Prosperous Seoul for All
Governance
Resilience through Collaboration.
Community
Stronger and Connected Community
Inclusive growth
Prosperous Seoul for All
Based on the clear understanding of risk factors, we aim to provide a comprehensive solution within a collaborative manner among various entities.
In the past, Seoul primarily has been focusing on the aftermath response system. 
In terms of pre-emptiveness, a guideline for the entire process of prevention-response-recovery will minimize the damage and allow rapid recovery. Employing capabilities of the private sectors and empowering citizens against emergencies to draw Seoul’s unique cooperative system are what we drive for.
We strive for a community-based system where all Seoulites who are in special need have opportunities to receive care services. 
Along with the demographic shifts and the change in family structure, heightened inter-generational conflicts and social isolation add to the enduring problems to further threaten community integration. Each community within Seoul’s district is a place for residents to build friendship with each other and develop a sense of belonging across the community. By doing so, policy blind spots in government-led welfare initiatives can be eliminated, and sustainable social safety net will be established. By utilizing our tools, Seoul must assert its role to become a warm and caring city for the resilience of vulnerable citizens.
All citizens have the right to benefit from economic growth and equitable development. 
The primary source of frustration in this area is unequal opportunities and inequitable growth. Thus, resilient growth must be the foundation of inclusiveness where people thrive and prosper. With the goal of protecting vulnerable people from urban threats, we will settle an equitable and inclusive economic system to reinforce individuals’ resilience.
Resilient Planning 
Development Process
5_ Setting Seoul’s Resilience Vision & Goal
Journey Towards Resilient Seoul
GOAL 1
GOAL 2

[Page 20]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019 | Resilient SEOUL | 
A strategy for city resilience 2019
SEMARANG (INDONESIA)
Prepares the workforce for the current job market through career centers, and provides vocational training for junior high school graduates.
SURAT (INDIA)
Supports micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises by organizing Expos and skills development training programs.
BYBLOS (LEBANON)
Improves the socio-economic conditions of its residents.
TOYAMA (JAPAN)
Provides employment opportunities for elderly and disabled people.
BANGKOK (THAILAND)
Inspects BMA buildings to improve the earthquake resistance capacity.
DAKAR (SENEGAL)
Reinstates public green spaces in the city and promotes eco-lifestyle
PARIS (FRANCE)
Mobilizes digital stakeholders to develop a dynamic and participatory mapping of urban resilience challenges.
QUITO (ECUADOR)
Provides safe public spaces for women against harassment on women in public areas.
BOULDER (US) 
Develops a volunteer community preparedness program so the citizens are better equipped with a deeper capacity to be first responders.
BERKELEY (US)
Improves the seismic safety of its most vulnerable apartment buildings; weak first stories, wooden frame buildings.
RIO DE JANEIRO (BRAZIL)
Upgrades access to safe housing to ensure residents’ basic infrastructure such as sanitation, street lighting and adequate paving.
NEW YORK (US)
Improves programs to nurture and protect all infants in New 
York so they thrive during their first year and beyond, Offers free and full-day pre-kindergarten for all New York children, and develops a comprehensive plan for high-quality early childcare.
NEW ORLEANS (US)
Lowers barriers to workforce participation and provides economic opportunities to increase equitable access and livable wages.
GLASGOW (SCOTLAND)
Promotes civic participation, and breaks down silos to bring stakeholders together for new approaches.
SAN FRANCISCO (US)
Builds a neighborhood support center to create empowered and resilient neighborhoods in times of crisis.
Program 4 
Program 13 
Program 9 
Proactive Management for Aging Infrastructure
Respect for Labor
Innovative Solutions in Community
Program 3 
Program 12
Program 8
Climate Change Response System
Microbusiness and the Self-employed
Childbirth and Childcare Service
Program 5 
Program 14
Safer Neighborhoods
Expansion of Social Economy
Program 2 
Program 11
Program 7 
Smart Safety Net
Employment Opportunities for the Elderly
Stable and Affordable Housing for All
Program 1 
Program 10 
Program 6 
Safety Governance
Youth Welfare and Jobs
Connected Neighborhood for the Vulnerable
Governance: 
Resilience through 
Collaboration
GOAL 1
Community:
Stronger and 
Connected Community
GOAL 2
Inclusive Growth: 
Prosperous Seoul for All
GOAL 3
THESSALONIKI (GREECE)
Converts the city car fleet and all public buses to electric and upgrades the air quality monitoring system to reduce air pollution and urban noise.
WELLINGTON (NEW ZEALAND)
Cooperates with city’s lifelines to prioritize action in case of disaster, analyzes all city infrastructure and make all data available for citizens.
As part of the global network of 100 Resilience Cities, pioneered by the 
Rockefeller Foundation, Seoul identified key strategies from the Network cities which have close alignment with actions in this Strategy. We look forward to continuing our links to the 100RC network and sharing best practices for our resilient future.
100RC Network | RESILIENT SEOUL | | RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019

[Page 21]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
GOAL 1
GOVERNANCE:
Resilience through 
Collaboration
Direction
Risk recognition
Proactive management
Cleaner air
Integrated solutions
Challenge
Lack of understanding of risks
Siloed approaches
Embracing new technologies
Outcome
All entities of Seoul will be prepared, aware of disaster-related risks, and ready to cooperate | RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019

[Page 22]
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
The Gyeongju earthquake in 2016, the communications blackout from the Ahyeon fire in 2018, as well as the central government issuing emergency anti-dust measures for seven consecutive days in early 2019 showed us that newly emerging disasters will now be our reality. On top of Seoul’s common disasters like heat waves, cold waves, and floods, the threat of new types of emergencies including large-scale disasters, earthquakes, aging infrastructure, and climate change reaches every corner of our society. People are more concerned as Seoul does not have much experience of dealing with these new challenges and yet the impacts of these disasters can be catastrophic. Heat waves, cold waves, and other social crimes have frequently occurred since 2017. Therefore, a comprehensive disaster management program is needed from public and private endeavors for prevention, preparedness, response, and recovery.
The Seoul Metropolitan Government has been providing emergency text messages to enhance safety awareness of citizens and monitoring aging infrastructure in case of disasters. Having recognized the need for a comprehensive and flexible emergency response sysGoal 1 
Governance: Resilience through Collaboration
The Seoul Metropolitan Government set the direction towards risk recognition, comprehensive problem solving through cooperation and pre-emptive measures for clean air. The challenges that Seoul and its citizens face are lack of understanding of the risks as they are relatively new, silos across relevant departments, and adaptability of new technologies since these new disasters are more driven from advanced technology.
Scaling up the public-private partnership in responding to disasters, Seoul developed five programs: to enhance public-private partnership in disaster preparedness, build a smart safety net, create climate change response system, engage in proactive management for aging infrastructure, and enable safer neighborhoods. When the policies are put into actions, all entities of Seoul will be fully aware of disaster-related risks, prepared, and ready to cooperate. 
To accomplish our goal, Seoul will strengthen governance structures to prevent, respond, and recover from any largescale disasters effectively.
Open Information Agora
Major Initiatives
Free Wi-Fi in public buildings
Roof garden project
Eco-mileage system
Solar panel projects
Yellow Carpet project as crime prevention design tem, the SMG established the Seoul Emergency Operations Center in 2002, heralding the introduction of an 
ICT-based 119 disaster response system.
The following are several ongoing policies related to safety and disaster preparedness. Not only the management of physical infrastructure but also safety education and training programs are one of the ongoing projects of Seoul. For citizens to have access to information in the face of adversity, transparent communication between the city government and the citizens is vital, from which the disclosure of administrative information to the public since 2013 began. Putting people at the heart of our policy, we tried to empower citizens to lead the way in safety management and risk preparedness. 
Regarding the climate-related crisis, Seoul leveraged our resources to mitigate greenhouse gas emissions and reduce fine dust levels to help citizens feel the resilience dividend of our improved environment in everyday lives. Not as just a short-term plan, but for the people of the next generations, an eco-friendly lifestyle will be embedded in the lives of Seoulites. A set of design principles applied to neighborhoods have discouraged crime significantly, elevating Seoul’s reputation and bringing a new look. | RESILIENT SEOUL | 
Released total of 15 million pieces of city administrative information for public access. 
Citizens, visitors, and others are free to use open wifi internet service.
Implemented green rooftops to save rainwater and water resources. Received the prestigious Energy Globe Awards and 2014 Globe 
Forum.
Since implemented in 2009, 122,000 TOE and 355,000 tons of 
CO2 have been reduced. Received award from the Economic and 
Social Council in 2013
Received the C40& Siemens City Climate Leadership Awards in 
Green Energy in 2014
Painted the pavements leading to crosswalks in school zones in yellow to guide children to avoid car accidents. Won best design prize in the Design for Asia awards in Hong Kong (2014)

[Page 23]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
ACTION 1
Safety Governance
Seoul Safety App 
Seoul has been providing Cell Broadcasting 
Service (CBS) to minimize losses from disasters. Adding up to this service, in 2018, Seoul launched a safety portal that provided real-time disaster & safety information and began “Seoul 
Safety App” service from which Seoulites are able to gain information about what-to-do and where to turn in a crisis. For example, when an earthquake occurs, breaking news alarms will be instantly sent out with directions to the nearest evacuation center. Without people having to search for instruction, the City transmits emergency information immediately to the citizens, enhancing civil protection. Warnings sent via the smartphone application are indispensable for people during times of emergencies. Such public alert and warning technology will minimize damage and enhance people’s response capabilities.
Smart Video Rescue
In situations where the caller’s inability to adequately ascertain the patient’s condition or provide emergency first aid care could result in serious injury or death, the smart video first-aid instruction involves a 119 consultant giving first aid direction in real-time until an ambulance reaches the site. 
This not only reduces error in diagnosis by enabling the consultant to see the patient, but also, through proper CPR instruction, significantly contributes to enhancing the quality of on-site first-aid care. Seoul will enable efficient primary measures directly from the EMS agent, and all procedures will be guided through the main monitor of the Seoul Emergency Operations Center. 
To widely utilize the emergency video calling system, the number of 119 emergency operators and dispatchers will also be increased. That way, a rapid response will be made in various emergencies like fires, facility breakdown, and medical treatment through video information, minimizing people’s damage. 
*An emergency call in Korea is 119.
strengthening safety procedures. By placing people at the heart of our safety policy, we will continue to foster new approaches 
Period 
2018~
Budget (KRW)
36 million 
Shocks and stresses
Safety hazards, complicated reporting system, lack of report infrastructure
Resilience goal
Not only preventative measures, but also ways to minimize damage in the face of disaster will be realized. 
Department
Safety Management Division, Contingency Response Division, 
Seoul Emergency Operations Center
Partner(s)
National Fire Service Academy, Seoul Institute of Technology
Improve safety information system and early response system
Goal 1 Governance: Resilience through Collaboration
Emergency Safety Call System
Single Number 120 is an integrated complaint handling system that collects inquiries and reports in Seoul. Aligning our resilience perspectives in the people-centered approach, Seoul will create a separate “safety call” page, which will be labeled “priority” to distinguish it from ordinary reports. Through its 24-hour consultations via phone calls, text messages, and social media, people will be able to get instant help they need. Regardless of their location people’s call will immediately be deemed an emergency and directly transferred to the dedicated agency. 
At the same time, cooperation among relevant organizations for a prompt response will be promised.
Safety e-Petition System, Sinmungo
We witness safety issues and potential threats which can lead to significant accidents. Thus, people should be encouraged to raise safety questions and concerns. 
By reporting the concerns through Single Number 120, or through the website http://eungdapso.seoul.go.kr/, which is also available on a mobile application, people will be involved in the process of building a safer environment. Citizens are often best positioned to identify safety concerns. 
By following up promptly by relevant City departments on all reports, we can address issues before an emergency occurs. Selected reporters will be rewarded after their cases are reviewed by a safety committee consisting of 4-5 experts and civil servants. 
The report can vary from at-risk conditions like sunken roads, and aging facilities to any workplace hazards near construction sites, which may have a considerable impact on people. This will further motivate people to be aware of the unsafe environment around them and be proactive in to enhance the safety experience of Seoulites so they can be determined initiators of 
Seoul’s policies.
ACTION 2
Seoul’s participatory budget
Incorporating resilience into the budget system is a way to greater safety governance. 
The city government must keep an eye on the safety budget as it is at the forefront for a quick and efficient preparedness. Creating policies based on strong investment will ultimately save lives of Seoulites from any disruption.
“Seoul Financial Strategic Committee” will be established to increase civic participation in developing budgetary policy. The committee will be upgraded to the highest level of the decision-making body that introduces a budgeting system with citizen participation. Based on such governance made in the metropolitan and district perspectives, the foundation for cooperation will be expanded to the entire village units at the grassroots.
Citizen Safety Guard
Empowering citizens in the face of disaster is the essence in minimizing the impact on people. Recognizing the need to upgrade 
Period 
2018-2023
Budget (KRW)
97.126 billion 
Expand citizen-led safety platforms civil preparedness, Seoul will promote the 
Citizen Safety Guard project to nurture a total of 100,000 safety guards in the next four years. Any Seoulite who went through the 
Safe Guard training is capable of becoming a Citizen Safety Guard. An inspired Safety 
Guard will be able to help people with quick 
CPR, evacuation, and emergency coordination until the ambulance arrives. Preparedness is vital, but an early response can be equally effective, and our neighbors around us can be dedicated safety professionals to help us. Becoming a Citizen Safety Guard requires the completion of eight hours of safety education program by the Fire and 
Disaster Headquarters of the Seoul Metropolitan Government, which includes two hours of Emergency Decision Making, three hours of Lifesaving Treatment like CPR, and three hours of Standard Disaster Procedures.
About 92,000 people have worked as 
Citizen Safety Guards, and an additional 
10,000 guards will be trained every year by 
2022. In the past, only adults were able to participate in this initiative, however, the 
PROGRAM 1

[Page 24]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
Shocks and stresses
Lack of understanding of disaster risks, lack of awareness, lack of education and training tools
Resilience goal
Empower citizens, expand citizen-centered disaster management, resident participatory budget system
Department
Safety Management Division, Fire Administration Division, Safety Support Division, Facility Safety Division
Partner(s)
Seoul Volunteer Center, 25 District Offices age range will be broadened to include high school students. By visiting densely built-up residential areas, not least marginalized neighborhoods, Safety Guards will closely look after residents in special need and help grow connections across the community. By 2022, a safety training center in Dobong-gu will be launched to further activate citizen participatory education and training programs and to create safer and prosperous communities.
Safety Sheriff
Being insensitive to safety rules is another overlooked threat to our safety. To address this concern, Seoul developed a “Safety 
Watchdog” initiative to manage safety issues within the neighborhood. In order to envision our goal in a more comprehensive and city-wide manner, Seoul will advance this project into “Safety Sheriff,” which will operate in all districts and units within Seoul to ensure that residents themselves can lead the plan to inspect and discover risks and to prevent potential safety hazards. Safety 
Sheriff will consist of about 40 people per each district with a wide range of expertise in disaster and safety management. Safety 
Sheriff who completed mandatory safety education courses will detect and report common safety hazards easily found around us. By doing so, people will understand the importance of safety awareness near their neighborhood. Safety awareness is a constant realization every resident must always have. By regularly recognizing what is going on around their residential area, people will be able to mitigate disaster-related risks in a much earlier stage.
Early response system against emergency
As mentioned repeatedly, early response and citizens having knowledge about what to do in the face of an emergency is the utmost priority. 
Seoul Volunteer Center, along with Citizen 
Safety Guard Association and volunteer centers in seven districts, have been operating training programs where citizens were given opportunities to experience how to make a quick decision and give first-aid. Participants were highly satisfied with repeated simulation-based learning where they could get hands-on experience in preparedness education.
Also, the earthquake exercise drills with family members, the fine dust facilitator education program, the “Say Hello” campaign, and other activities ensured they can monitor storm and flood preparedness, and check up on traffic safety. These exercises will not be a one-time event but will be held on a regular basis in all 25 districts. 
Furthermore, an evaluation index to assess the effectiveness of each activity will help develop its sustainability.
Safety measures know no boundary. The scope of safety management goes beyond the capacity of individual cities. Thus, Seoul joined the “Make Cities Resilient” campaign by UNDRR in 2013 to address issues of local governance and urban risks and has been continuously pooling our resources to enhance urban resilience. 
In 2016, Seoul was selected as one of the 100 Resilient Cities, pioneered by the Rockefeller Foundation, keeping our relationship with global cites sound. 
As the issue of fine dust gets serious, having a strong bond with neighboring countries and cooperation is ever more important nowadays. Thus, Seoul is hosting the International Urban Resilience Forum in September to share best practices and policies related to disaster management, develop agenda reflecting examples of disasters specific to Seoul, and seek solutions to urban challenges for the future.
On top of that, Seoul will also launch the 2019 Seoul Mayors Forum on Climate 
Change in October to uphold international cooperation to tackle climate change from local governance perspectives.
Boost International network in urban challenges 
Initiative 
Boost 
International network in urban challenges
Department
Safety Management Division, 
Environmental 
Policy Division
Explanation 
Host Seoul International 
Urban Resilience Forum, 
2019 Seoul Mayors Forum on Climate Change
Period 
2019~
Long term
Budget 
150 million KRW
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
SUPPORTING ACTIONS
SUPPORTING ACTIONS
Goal 1 Governance: Resilience through Collaboration

[Page 25]
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
Goal 1 Governance: Resilience through Collaboration
People often think they are far from disasters and emergencies. However, disaster is a sudden, calamitous event, bringing great damage, loss, destruction and devastation to life and property. Thus, we need both safe infrastructures as well as an institutional framework to quickly respond to emergencies in saving the affected people.
To realize the goal of safety Seoul in 2016, the Seoul Emergency Operation 
Center established a Golden Time Rule for each of 55 different types of disasters. The aim of this rule is to promote a general awareness of the importance of “golden hour,” which is a time limit for disaster response that is set to maximize the number of lives saved, prevent the escalation of disasters, and enable more efficient response to various types of disasters. 
After analyzing the characteristics of 55 types of disasters, decisions were made within the optimum golden hour for each type. In the event of a fire, for example, the current rule of thumb is that arrival on-site will take five minutes for large complex facilities and three minutes for subway infrastructure. Thus, definitive fire rescue must be initiated within this less-than-tenminute window. Based on the in-depth evaluation of all 55 types of emergencies, Seoul developed a guideline for initial rescue system and has been providing regular training sessions for people to not only save their own lives but help their neighbors. The program offers essential skills for primary care including performing proper CPR and makes an emergency assessment, and strategies for improving decision-making in emergency preparedness. In the coming year, Seoul aims to have a total of 100,000 Citizen Safety Guards and is offering various in-person disaster training courses for trainees to interact with other learners and seasoned disaster response experts.
The Civil Protection Program for disaster-prone groups and socially vulnerable people is another ongoing initiative by the SMG. Field Trip Chaperone 
Program that requires a paramedic agent to accompany in field trips or external activities of elementary and special schools has been running since 2014. 
Over the three-year period, this program performed 2,612 safety procedures for 249 schools by 2016.
Currently, SMG is planning to improve infrastructure for recruiting more Citizen Safety Guards and aims for 91% of fire trucks arriving on the scene within five minutes by 2020.
“Seoul’s Golden Time Rule” | RESILIENT SEOUL |

[Page 26]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
PROGRAM 2
ACTION 1
ACTION 2
Smart Safety Net 
The Seoul Metropolitan Government has let its citizens utilize 4,915 categories of public data since 2012 and incorporated them into a scientific administration system through big-data analysis of the routes of late night buses and public bicycles and evaluating the prospect of commercial areas. Also, by integrating the LTE data of KT with the public data, public-private data will be provided to analyze the living population of Seoul. Then, urban phenomenon will be stored as data and people will be able to receive tailored information through AI-based technology. 
Seoul is known for state-of-the-art IT technology. In order to serve up to the standard of the 
Fourth Industrial Revolution, by 2022, 50,000 sensors will be installed to collect city data inSeoul operates 80,000 surveillance cameras in total, of which 50,000 managed by each district offices. Statistics from the 
Korean National Police Agency proved the effects of open-street Close Circuit Television (CCTV) on crime that after the installation, the crime rates of Seoul decreased by 26.6%. Seoul will further enhance the crime prevention effects to apply cutting edge technology such as artificial intelligent-embedded CCTVs by 2021 that provide face recognition, vehicle recognition, and automatic tracking to offset human errors. Also, each district will be financially supported for intelligent CCTVs and AI deep learning-based services. 
With a rising number of surveillance cameras, the city is short of staff in charge of monitoring the cameras, and keeping track of all situations. Thus, the AI system must 
Create a big-data driven smart safe city
Build smart CCTV network
Goal 1 Governance: Resilience through Collaboration cluding fine dust, noise, light pollution, tremors, temperature, humidity, wind speed, wind direction, and vehicle speed in places like streetlamps, security lights, and community centers.
To encourage funding and pool the talents of the best minds of private enterprises that own big-data, a Public-Private model will be formed, led by financial, distribution, and communication companies, academia, and public institutions to implement an innovative framework for data-analysis to improve quality of Seoulites’ lives.
As the very first public organization to integrate 
468 city administration systems into unified data storage, Seoul will continue to open public data and support the development of applications by the private sectors.
be incorporated to improve our capability of building urban safety.
SMG will create Smart Seoul CCTV Safety 
Center to build the ground for urban safety infrastructure and smart Seoul safety network by connecting with the entire districts, 911 Emergency Operation Centers, and the Korean National Police Agency to share the same CCTV information.
By utilizing smart technology and the information and communication infrastructure, we expect to make use of new tools to improve public safety, in crime-fighting and to keep an eye on what is going on in the City. 
An intelligent video surveillance system will manage all digital data and meet a variety of service needs, including police collaboration, coordination, decision-making and response times in emergencies.
Period 
2019-2022
Budget (KRW)
45.98 billion 
Period 
2018-2021
Budget (KRW)
97.44 billion 
Shocks and stresses
Civilians’ inability to access data information, Lack of public-private cooperation in collection and analysis of data
Resilience goal
Enhance the public usability of data through Smart City Data 
Center and the big-data storage for public data to move towards a big-data driven smart city.
Department
Smart City Policy Bureau, Big Data Division
Partner(s)
Financial institutes, telecommunications, academia, public institutions
Shocks and stresses
Decentralized CCTV data management, intra-regional cooperation
Resilience goal
Advance CCTV technology to prevent crimes, prepare safer 
Seoul for citizens, enhance disaster preparedness, shorten response times
Department
Information Communication & Security Division
Partner(s)
25 District offices, fire station, Korean National Police Agency, 
Emergency Center
Korea’s traffic accidents, especially the number of deaths from intersection crossings, is three times of the OECD countries’ average. Among pedestrian-related traffic accidents, 22% occurs on the crosswalk. As the number of “Smombies” 
- smartphone zombies - increases, pedestrian fatalities at crosswalks are expected to rise as well. To address such circumstances, a huge LED traffic screen will be implanted onto the road with audio guidance to let pedestrians know whether they can cross. This would reduce the number of pedestrian accidents and discourage anyone who unexpectedly walks into the road in red light. By doing so, pedestrians will be more responsive in crossing the road, and drivers at night will be able to detect any pedestrian rushing to the other side of the road.
Smart Crossing
SUPPORTING ACTIONS

[Page 27]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
Embrace AI-based surveillance systems on infrastructures
To places where the city cannot hire staff to monitor the system, intelligent rail robots with AI-based information system embedded will be installed for Smart surveillance on infrastructure in all districts. This initiative was selected as the Ministry of ICT’s public service of the year and will be adopted in Eunpyeong-gu first and be expanded to all districts.
Set up BIM-based comprehensive management system of bridge facilities
Seoul will embrace a BIM-based management system, an intelligent 3D model-based platform, to adopt state-of-the-art technology in the maintenance of bridge facilities and systematically manage the growing data. 
Apply IoT based real-time fire alarm system
Inspection of fire protection facilities were held regularly. However, Seoul will make it into a real-time checkup by using IoT system to share the data from fire detectors with all fire departments from private buildings. That way, civil servants in the fire department do not have to visit all the buildings, and instead can oversee the operating condition from the control room.
Smart Infrastructure
Smart Fire 
Prevention 
Look after elderly single-person households using IoT
For 25 million of elderly living alone, or on the national basic income program, Seoul will use analyze the data from IoT system of their daily activity and detect any extreme temperatures or humidity. It will make an emergency call if there is any sign of an emergency.
Expand “Ansimi,” a free danger monitoring service, to all districts “Ansimi” a free danger monitoring service, once limited to women’s use only, will be expanded to all districts and to all individuals including the elderly, the physically challenged, and children. Ansimi is a 24-hour smart one-stop safety network that connects with 32,597 CCTVs and smart devices to monitor in real-time and provide rescue support as well with a control center in each district.
Smart Welfare 
System
Initiative 
Smart Crossing
Smart 
Infrastructure
Smart Fire 
Prevention
Smart Welfare
Department
Smart City Policy 
Bureau
Road Facilities 
Division, Bridge 
Maintenance 
Division
Seoul 
Metropolitan 
Fire and Disaster 
Headquarters
Senior Citizen 
Support Division, 
Women and 
Family Policy 
Affairs Office 
Explanation 
LED lights implanted on the road to reduce crossing accidents
AI-based smart surveillance system, BIM-based management system of bridge facilities
Remote monitoring of fire facility
IoT-based care service for elderly, Ansimi service in all districts
Period 
2018-2021
Budget 
6.2 billion KRW
2019~ 
2.8 billion KRW
2019~
1.0 billion KRW
2018-2022
12.8 billion KRW
Dating back to 1949, Seoul has had a long history of high-quality public transportation system. With the period of the rapid growth of Seoul, its bus system also followed the lead. The overhaul of the Seoul bus system in 2004 was referred to as the “Bus Reformation,” opening a new chapter in public transportation to be faster and more convenient. Most bus stops have been relocated to the middle of the road to lessen traffic congestion. Bus-only lanes, free transit fares, and bus cards also ensure excellent bus services even during rush hour.
Seoul is the city that never sleeps. Owl Bus, the city’s intra-city buses that run nine routes exclusively from midnight to 5:00 am, is one of the well-received initiatives in transportation. Numerous restaurants and markets are open until the wee hours of the morning and you can easily spot people on the streets even at 3 am. Dongdaemun Night Market, an open marketplace for all-night-long, is packed with people, bustling with nocturnal shoppers, making it very hard to find parking spots. A place like this where streets are covered with people needs all-night public transportation. Owl Bus lessens the financial burdens to people who work late at night or those who have no choice but to ride a late-night taxi. Started from the idea of a Seoulite, Owl Bus operates on lines selected based on big-data analysis collected from 3 billion mobile devices and 5 million pieces of taxi data. 
The adoption of Owl Bus allowed people to save transportation expenses that were spent on taxi fares before. Also, with public transportation still offered at night, people feel safer in the city, and it can address the growing inconvenience due to the late-night taxi’s refusal of passengers. The numbers speak for themselves. In 2017, the demand for Seoul’s public buses dropped 1.7% whereas the preference for Owl 
Bus surged 28% over the same period. There were once inquiries for late night subway service; however, the subway requires large-scale ridership and it would be too much of a burden to operate subways late at night with fewer passengers than daytime. Therefore, it is more efficient to operate buses during late night and dawn hours.
There is another city transportation that was named after an animal. Taken from squirrel wheels, Squirrel 
Buses are customized rush hour buses that go back and forth between sections with extreme congestion. 
They operate on short sections with few buses as the city’s response to the citizens’ demand for less congestion and the need for efficient bus operation. Launched in 2017, squirrel busses run between seven routes to ease over-crowdedness in the Seoul metropolitan area.
Congestion relief conditions and the citizen response to the Squirrel Bus and the Owl Bus implementation were monitored to determine the feasibility of expanded operations of the buses, including operations after office hours and operations in other areas. All the data of citizens’ usage of public transportation cards including buses, subways, and taxis, and mobile communications are collected and analyzed through big-data analysis to find out the demand of people for these new services. By doing so, Seoul proactively answered the call of its people and solved the daily hassles of Seoulites.
Owl Bus and 
Squirrel Bus 
Goal 1 Governance: Resilience through Collaboration
SUPPORTING ACTIONS

[Page 28]
ONE TREE PLANTED reduces 35.7g of ﬁne dust absorbs 664kcal of heat per 1m2 generates 1.799kg of oxygen per year
ONE DIESEL CAR Creates 1.680g of ﬁne dust per year
Korea Forest Service, Korea Transportation Safety Authority
Reduces ﬁne dust pollutants emitted from 64 thousands of old diesel cars
Provides a cooling eﬀect equivalent to 
24m air conditioners running for 5 hrs
Generates oxygen for 21 million people for a year
ACTION 1
Year
2005
2012
2013
2014
2015
Emission Cuts vs 2014 vs 2015
Total
Emissions
49,445
48,311
46,817
45,673
45,646 △27 (△0.1%) △3.799 (△8%)
Unit: 1,000 tons of CO2
Planting 
30 Million Trees 
Cuts ﬁne dust level
Cools urban heat
Cleans the air 
PROGRAM 3
Climate Change Response System
In line with the climate targets of the Paris 
Agreement, Seoul announced in 2015, “The 
Promise of Seoul: Taking Action Against Climate Change,” a comprehensive strategy to mitigate and adapt to tackle climate change and to reduce 25% of the 2005 greenhouse gas emissions by 2020. In December that year, Seoul formally proposed to establish the new climate regime by cutting its emissions at the UNFCCC COP21. Seoul took part in the C40 Cities Climate Leadership 
Group, C40, joining other influential cities around the world to tackle climate change and reduce greenhouse gas emissions. 
5-year development plan for solar energy to motivate ordinary people to participate in increasing solar panels for home installation. Currently, around 30,000 households in Seoul are equipped with mini solar panels, but Seoul’s ambitious plan will see the number grow by 1 million by 2022, allowing additional 310,000 households to generate solar energy every year. Newly constructed buildings will be required to install solar panels, and existing buildings will be subsidized to replace with mini solar panels. 
More public building will be installed with mini solar generators, and the number of solar panels on the roof of townhouse and the patio of private buildings will increase to 1 million. The government-owned land will be used to build more solar generators and solar panels, and this project will further allow deploying utility-scale solar panels on public lands.
Eco-friendly Road
In line with the effort to realize energy transition, Seoul will apply photocatalytic cement-based coating that exhibits air purifying materials to road pavements for eco-friendly and clean road conditions.
Mitigate greenhouse gas emissions
Goal 1 Governance: Resilience through Collaboration
By committing to enhancing the health, well-being, and resilience benefits of the global community, Seoul is positioned as a leader for climate action and global partnership by chairing the Summit in 2009.
The total amount of greenhouse emissions has been cut by 1 million tons year-on-year since 2013. Since 2015, however, the rate at which these emissions were reduced has plateaued. The major causes of these rising risks include abnormally extreme temperatures and a surge in energy consumption due to climate change.
Planting 30 Million Trees
According to the National Institute of Forest 
Science of the Korea Forest Service, planting one tree can reduce 35.7g of fine dust per year, absorb 664 kcal per sq meter of atmospheric heat, and create 1,799kg of oxygen every year.
Seoul created 2,203 forests and parks across the entire city over the past five years under the “Thousand Forests, Thousand Gardens” project that turns the grey of the city into green. About 15.3 million trees had been planted and the percentage of land taken up by parks and green spaces also increased.
Recognizing positive reactions of the public, the city plans to take on the “Planting Trees 
Project 2022-3000,” to plant 30 million trees by 2022. Starting from 5 million this year, we will add 15 million more trees to reach 30 million to provide urban greening for residents.
Planting 30 million trees reduces particulate pollution generated by 64,000 aged diesel cars for a year, provides a cooling effect equivalent to that of 24 million air conditioners running for five hours, and produces oxygen equivalent to the amount that 21 million adults can inhale for a year.
Period 
2014-2022
Budget (KRW)
2.07 trillion
Shocks and stresses
Rise of urban temperature, extreme temperature, electricity consumption
Resilience goal
Reach our greenhouse gas reduction goal, zero plastics, transformation to renewable sources of energy
Department
Environmental Policy Division, Parks and Landscape Policy Division, Climate and Air Quality Division, Road Management Division
Partner(s)
Hyundai Motor Company
Eco-friendly Vehicles
To achieve this goal, Seoul pursues the realization of a low-carbon city which requires more emissions to be cut. By 2020, Seoul aims to reach 37 million tons of greenhouse gas emissions. By 2022, Seoul will produce more eco-friendly vehicles including 80,000 electric cars and transform major emitters like buses, taxis, and low-efficient cars into electric vehicles. Moreover, cooperating with car manufacturers, six hydrogen car refilling stations will be built by 2021. 
Solar City Project
As its comprehensive plan states, Seoul discloses its aspiration to be “Solar City Project.” In November 2017, the Climate and 
Environment Headquarters unveiled the | RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019

[Page 29]
ACTION 2
PROGRAM 3
Climate Change Response System
The World Health Organization says particulate matter, or fine dust, has the greatest effect on human health, causing lung cancer and other respiratory diseases. Particulate matter (PM2.5) is one of the leading causes of heart disease and stroke (58%), as well as respiratory disease (18%), lung cancer (6%) of the 1 million deaths in Korea.
Reduce fine dust
Goal 1 Governance: Resilience through Collaboration
As such, air pollution caused by fine dust has directly influenced people’s lives. Seoul plans to lower the annual concentration of fine dust from 25µg/m3 as monitored in 
2017 to 15 µg/m3 by 2025 and set up its yearly targets accordingly.
Period 
2018-2022
Budget (KRW)
86.5 billion 
Shocks and stresses
Diesel-powered commercial vehicles, air pollution, sustained high-level of fine dust, climate disaster
Resilience goal
Protect health of the vulnerable, guarantee citizens’ right to breath clean air in three direction: mitigation, public health, governance
Department
Climate and Environment Headquarters, Vehicle Emissions Control Division, Housing Policy Division
Partner(s)
Seoul Institute of Technology, SH, Seoul Energy Corporation, Korea District Heating Corporation
Eco-friendly Condensing Boiler
As ordinary water heaters used in households are a major emitter of nitrogen oxide, 
Seoul proposed a mandatory policy to replace 250,000 aged household boilers with condensing water heaters or boilers that are highly energy efficient and eco-friendly by 2022. All newly constructed buildings will enjoy green heating and cooling technologies where using energy saves the environment just as much as it saves money. 
Low Emission Zone (LEZ)
A Low-Emission Zone is an area to restrict polluting heavy diesel vehicles to encourage vehicles to be replaced with alternative fuel sources. All vehicles traveling within this zone will need to fulfill much tighter emission standards or pay a daily charge. 
By assigning parts of Seoul the Low Emission Zone (LEZ), the City plans to provide benefits and penalties according to the eco-friendly vehicle rating system and limit all diesel vehicles entering the Seoul Metropolitan area. To qualifying eco-friendly cars, financial benefits including discounts in using parking lots will be provided on top of subsidies from the government when purchasing green vehicles.
Eco-friendly Apartment Complex
As part of Seoul’s efforts to mitigate fine dust level, Seoul Housing and Communities Corporation painted the outer layer of apartment buildings with photocatalytic materials that reduce the major emitters of fine dust, nitrogen oxide, and sulfur dioxide. When new apartments are built, the 
City government will create an “urban forest” that prevents the inflow of fine dust between roads and houses.
Green Neighborhoods
On top of this measure, adopting greenification on the lower stories of buildings was applied for the first time in Korea at the end of 2018, and after evaluating the effectiveness on reducing fine dust level, 
Seoul will extend this initiative to more apartment complexes.
Broad-leaved trees are known to be effective in reducing fine dust levels by absorbing fine particulate matter (PM2.5). Seoul will create green space in walkways near the streets to better the air quality where people are exposed to polluted air from fossil fuels. Multiple layer green spaces can reduce fine dust 20 percent more and 0.7 degrees Celsius more than a single layer. 
Furthermore, Seoul will create green forest areas in pedestrian spaces with materials that absorb particulate matter.
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019

[Page 30]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
Goal 1 Governance: Resilience through Collaboration
Climate change poses an extremely challenging and unprecedented shift in the world. The international society strongly urges for mitigating greenhouse gas emissions and fossil fuels. Aligning with such global voices, Seoul selected a new approach to involve citizens for our environment. One Less Nuclear Power Plan is the flagship climate-related policy that puts Seoulites at the core. 
One Less Nuclear Power Plant, as its name implies, saves 2 million 
Tonne of Oil Equivalent, which is a unit of energy replacing the amount of energy released by burning one tonne of crude oil, equivalent to the energy volume produced by one nuclear power plant. 
In the course of years from April 2012 to December 2016, about 
3.37 million Seoulites took parts in the “One Less Nuclear Power 
Plant” initiative. It is now in its second phase that will be completed by 2022. Apart from the number, the fact that people shared ideas and added their voices was meaningful. As a result, this participatory effort incorporated habits of reducing energy consumption in people’s daily lives, lowering Seoul’s energy consumption compared to other cities in Korea. Seoul was also able to save 15% of gas usage when the nationwide average was only 
5% in 2014. Clearly, Seoul’s energy demand is handled efficiently.
Our success has given lessons to other city governments. One example is the Energy Independent Town. As part of its six-year-old 
One Less Nuclear Power Plant initiative, the City has designated energy self-sufficient neighborhoods that produce energy and participate in energy conservation activities. Under the energy self-reliant village plan, a village is converted from being a power consumer to a village that creates profit through efficient use and generation of energy, and shares energy in connection with energy welfare. Their activities include installing LED lighting and residential solar systems, and Seoul plans to increase the number of such energy self-reliant villages to 140 by 2020.
The energy-independent community plan is paying off. The advent of mini solar panel induced more jobs in the relevant sectors and the market expansion. This is indeed the power of One Less 
Nuclear Power Plant.
One Less Nuclear 
Power Plant | RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019

[Page 31]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
ACTION 1
ACTION 2
Big-data Forecast System for Aging 
Infrastructure
Thus, Seoul will transform all the information on the current state of its infrastructures to the big-data system and detect any functional problem or failure in the future. 
By 2019, Seoul will invest 7 billion KRW in developing a big-data analysis system. All facility management information will be collected into the database and be used to predict the change in conditions and maintenance cost for each facility. A futurepredicting model that calculates the best time for maintenance and reinforcement will be established.
Integrated Underground Facility Management
The recent fire that broke out at a KT 
Corp., a company that provides the fastest internet connection and the rupture of an underground hot water pipe in 2018 gave us an opportunity to raise awareness on 
Maintenance Check on Infrastructure
A real-time monitoring center to check on city infrastructure anytime, particularly bridges and tunnels, forms the foundation for proactive maintenance and a stronger disaster preparedness system. Starting with a pilot program in 2019, the central government, citizens, experts and related organizations will work together to maximize the effects of urban infrastructure maintenance. Since aging facilities require timely repairs and replacements, Seoul will actively propose financial and systematic support from the central government. By 
June 2022, about 60 road facilities and 
90 pieces of intra-city information will be linked directly to the monitoring center and the dedicated staff will be able to control and address any malfunction or breakage through remote access directly from the center.
Safety Management of Private Buildings
Seoul has conducted an in-depth analysis of old private buildings and allowed the owners to go through self-analysis for their buildings. Furthermore, the Amendment of 
Restriction on Special Local Taxation Act has been implemented since 2016 to provide tax subsidies for completing renovation with seismic designs.
Period 
2018-2022
Budget (KRW)
606.48 billion 
PROGRAM 4 managing underground facilities including cable tunnels, and hot water pipes. To address the issue, the SMG formed a public-private task force and established the “comprehensive underground facility management system,” which will come into effect in July. Seoul’s underground facilities consist of common utility tunnels, gas pipes, waterworks and a sewage system that cover over 52,697 km. Among them, cable tunnels, power plants, and gas are overseen by the private sectors, making it difficult for the City government to fully grasp their status. Engaging in such matter, the 
Seoul 
Metropolitan 
Government appealed for a revision on the safetyrelated legislation so that the SMG will be the control tower in managing, monitoring, and inspecting the underground facilities joined by district offices. By upgrading the comprehensive management system of the underground facilities, we will sustain and improve our resources.
Seoul will continue to monitor safety standards and how well they are operated within the City’s safety management system in cooperation with 25 district offices which plans to have their own construction safety centers.
Advanced Seismic Design
The largest earthquake in Seoul occurred near Yeongdeungpo-gu in 2004 with a magnitude of 2.5. However, concerns have grown ever since the 2016 Gyeongju earthquake with a magnitude of 5.8 causing massive damage. If a sizable earthquake strikes this densely populated capital city, the overall damage will be tremendous where the average earthquake resistant rate was only 19.1% as of 2018. 
Addressing this downfall, the 
Seoul 
Metropolitan Government aims to raise the 
76.7% earthquake-resistant rate for public buildings to 100% by 2022 and plans to complete earthquake-resistant construction of the 245 buildings among 634 public facilities. Building robust infrastructure that is reliable in the face of potential earthquake hazards will be the first step to address the threats head-on and safeguard the residents.
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
83.2%
88.2%
91.5%
95.2%
100%
Seismic-resistant rate for public facilities
Proactive Management for Aging Infrastructure
With rapid economic development in the 
70s through 80s, most of Seoul’s major infrastructures, built around the same period, are getting older quickly. Among Seoul’s bridges, tunnels, water and sewage, and other facilities, the rate of aging infrastructures older than 30 years will surge from the current 
32% to 61% in 10 years, and even up to 
86% in just 20 years.
The standard of the infrastructure quality back then was set to provide massive and prompt supply during the 70s and 80s. However, it 
In times of rapid transformation during the 
70s, Seoul constructed a vast number of buildings and houses that are now in need of renovation. After a series of accidents, fears grew over the safety of Seoul’s crumbling infrastructure. In order to prepare for the next century against risk factors and 
Period 
2018-2022
Budget (KRW)
13.76 billion 
Forecast aging infrastructure and integrate safety management system
Strengthen real-time monitoring system for infrastructure
Goal 1 Governance: Resilience through Collaboration cannot meet the higher safety requirements and the quality of infrastructure today, fitting to the current income level.
Seoul’s infrastructure is aging, underperforming, and in need of sustained care and action. A heavily tilted focus on constructing new infrastructure leaves a hole in the safety of our citizens from building collapse, sunken roads, sewage leaks, and burst heating pipes. 
This calls for action to incorporate the management of our aging infrastructure into the 
City’s institutionalized framework. financial burdens, the City will change the current facility management system to proactively serve mid- to long-term resilience. 
Through this, we will foster a safer and reliable city. 
Shocks and stresses
Concerns for facility breakdown, possible gas explosion, decentralized management of underground facility
Resilience goal
Separately managed underground facilities will be controlled by the City and evaluated through a big-data analysis.
Department
Safety Management Division, Road Facilities Division, Road 
Management Division, Office of Waterworks, Water Reclamation Planning Division
Partner(s)
KT, KEPCO, Korea Gas Corporation, Seoul Energy, Korea District 
Heating Corp.
Shocks and stresses
Collapse of public infrastructure, earthquake hazards
Resilience goal
Facilities will be linked to the Real-time Monitoring Center to enhance the disaster preparedness in times of crisis.
Department
Safety Management Division, Facility Safety Division, Contingency Response Division
Partner(s)
Seoul Institute of Technology

[Page 32]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
Goal 1 Governance: Resilience through Collaboration
The Seoul Station area is located at the heart of the Seoul Metropolitan Area, but due to a rather complicated structure with train rails, the regions around the station were difficult for drivers and pedestrians to cross. 
Since its construction in the 70s, the Seoul Station overpass had remained as one of the most underdeveloped areas until renovation began. The original plan was to completely remove it, but a slight change of the idea brought about the difference. With a hope to transform the once an elevated highway into a high line public park for people to rest, the roadway was reborn as a beautiful sky garden for pedestrians to enjoy. 
Seoullo translates into the dual meaning of “towards Seoul” and “Seoul Street.” 7017 marks the combination of the construction year of the overpass, 1970, and its new function as a public walkway in 2017.
Since the project was launched in 2015, the main challenge was working with local businesses and residents, providing an alternative way to alleviate traffic concerns, and safety issues during the construction. 
The City held 73 rounds of meeting with residents, 7 gatherings, and 
13 consultations with partner organizations to listen to the voices of local stakeholders and citizens who felt differently about the Seoullo project. After a period of long arguments and discussion, finally, on 
May 20th 2017, the overpass was transformed into a matrix of sky garden full of flora and fauna.
Winy Mass, a Dutch architect and the founder and chief architect of 
MVRDV, won the design competition for the Seoullo project that reflected Seoul’s vision and strategy to turn a concrete structure into a place of vitality and life. A paradigm shift from an automobile-focused area to citizen-friendly pathway was realized. In less than a month since the opening of Seoullo 7017, more than 2 million people visited to see the renewed greenery. As of November 2017, on average, about 20,000 people on weekdays and 40,000 people on weekends find themselves enthralled with their new landmark.
The completion of Seoullo 7017 does not mean the end of the project’s work. The Seoul Station 7017 project will continue to focus on underdeveloped areas of Seoul. 
Seoullo 7017
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019

[Page 33]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
ACTION 1
ACTION 2
Of the 10 million populations in Seoul, the number of women is reported as 5.19 million, a little more than that of men. 
Studies consistently find that women around the world tend to have much higher levels of fear of crime than men. According to the Seoul Survey conducted in 2010, women in Seoul fear crime more than the 
OCED average for women. Since 2013, 
Women Safety Sheriff
Spy cam crimes have become so prevalent that female police officers now regularly inspect public toilets to check for cameras in women’s stalls. To discourage the huge number of spy cam crimes against women and to ensure a safe city led by women, 
Seoul will increase anti-spy cam campaigns to crack down hidden cameras and any illicit footage inside subway stations, public buildings, universities, and private buildings.
Period 
2013~
Budget (KRW)
39.75 billion 
Promote Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED)
Build safer neighborhoods for women
PROGRAM 5
Seoul has been pursuing policies tailored to women to promote gender equality and a safety net for women, and we will further tighten the safety standard so that no one is able to get away with crime against women. This means keeping our work to build up what we are already doing and raising our bar to build a sustainable neighborhood.
Women’s Safe Mail Box
Women who live alone very often do not feel secure for safety concerns. We see on the news that crimes specifically targeting women who live alone are on the rise. 
Offenders pretend they are delivering mail or a package and suddenly reveal their true intention once the door is opened. Seoul will expand the number of Safe Mail Boxes and Women’s Safe Shelters to 300 by 2022 in residential areas where many women living in one person households do not have to meet delivery people face-to-face. 
Safer Neighborhoods 
Seoul started promoting design as a source of urban growth. In 2010, the City was designated as the “World Design Capital” thanks to such efforts. Furthermore, Seoul made a substantial headway in employing design to address diverse social problems including crime, school bullies, dementia, and stress. This way, the effective urban design will lead to not only a reduction in the incidence of crime but also an improvement of the quality of life.
This serves as a driving force to create safer neighborhoods through Crime Prevention 
Through Environmental Design (CPTED). By applying design to marginalized and highcrime districts, Seoul hopes to see deterring criminal behavior and alter the physical layout of neighborhoods.
The City hears people’s voices through hearing committees and surveys and derives design solutions fit for each region. 
Using this framework, Seoul has developed and improved the prototype for its Crime 
Period 
2012Budget (KRW)
-
Goal 1 Governance: Resilience through Collaboration
Prevention Design and was given the presidential citation at the 3rd Korea Crime 
Prevention Contest. In June 2019, Seoul won Sylvia Harris Award at America’s SEGD 
Global Design Awards, which corresponds to the grand prize in the field of public design.
The Skyline Wayfinding project applied to 
Geumho-dong displays addresses on the top exterior of each house. The neighborhood was densely packed with old and low-to-the-ground houses, which makes hard for people to say their exact location in emergency. 
The Crime Prevention Design that was applied in Mapo and Gangseo district in 
2012, reduced the crime rates and facilitated capacity of each neighborhood. Seoul’s design governance will surely promote safer residential areas and prevent any hazard within people’s neighborhoods. We are already making strides to explore new CPTED-related projects.
Shocks and stresses
Crime, high level of fear felt by residents, lack of social cohesion in the neighborhood
Resilience goal
Increase events to engage residents in discussing regional problems as a preventative measure, enhance residents’ sense of belonging, create community spirit
Department
Culture Policy Division
Partner(s)
Korean National Police Agency, Districts
Shocks and stresses
Crimes against women, fear felt by women elevated
Resilience goal
Align with initiatives by the United Nations and other cities around the world to end violence against women, provide services for a safer city for women
Department
Women’s Policy Division
Partner(s)
Districts, village communities, Korean National Police Agency
Women’s Safety Scouts
A nighttime escort program for women is gaining popularity in Seoul, as people are using the service over the past years. For women who return home late at night, 
Seoul will increase the number of Women’s 
Safety Scouts and expand the service to all districts year by year.
Women’s Safe Village
Furthermore, in order to address violence against women including sexual abuse, domestic violence, and sexual trafficking, 
Seoul will foster village networks run by each district to encourage residents to form a “sheriff” network within the neighborhood to create a safer environment for women. This initiative will be supported by residents, NGOs, local police offices, and the districts where residents themselves will oversee projects to better community surroundings.

[Page 34]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
Seoul will increase the security staff of 559 public elementary schools and 13 special schools for children with disabilities. Thus, all school zones in Seoul will be a safer place for children to play, study, and rest. That way, parents will feel more relieved and can entrust the care of their children to schools. The presence of security officers provides the physical safety of students and children. 
Cultivate safer school zone
Initiative 
Safer school zone
Department
Education Policy 
Division
Explanation 
Increase number of security guards in public and private elementary schools
Period 
-
Budget 
31.83 billion 
KRW
With the universal use of mobile phones, people rarely use public phone booths. Seoul renovated the old and unused public phone booths to transform into the Safe Phone Booths to take refuge from the dangers of crime. 
Safe Phone Booths will automatically lock its door when people come into and report a crime, then a siren goes off and an alarm light turns on for help. The public phone booth, near Pungmoon Girl’s High School in Bukchon Hanok Village, was designated Seoul’s first safe phone booth in 2015, and the service has been expanded to provide a free wifi connection, charging service, etc. Working with KT Linkus, a subsidiary of KT and the company in charge of phone booth maintenance, Seoul will expand the usage of these phone booths which are already located all over the place to provide more convenient service to the public. 
Old Public Pay Phone Box → Safe Phone Booth
Goal 1 Governance: Resilience through Collaboration
SUPPORTING ACTIONS
SUPPORTING ACTIONS

[Page 35]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
GOAL 2
COMMUNITY:
Stronger and Connected 
Community
Direction
No more policy blind spots
Community integration
Warm caring city for the vulnerable
Social cohesion
Challenge
Demographic and family structural changes
Inter-generational conflicts
Disconnected communities
Outcome
More solidified and integrated community system will make a viable and livable city

[Page 36]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
Provide free lunch with organic ingredient to all public-school students. 
Establish 188 care centers for the elderly.
Initiative that has been implemented since 2012 to help build relationship among residents.
Provide necessity goods to marginalized neighbors.
*Ondol: underfloor heating system
Free and organic lunch
Major Initiatives
Dolbom(care) service for the elderly
Village community
The Ondol for Hope
With demographic changes due to an aging society and declining birth rates and the rise of single-person households of youth and elderly, a breakdown of the community has become one of the most destructive problems in our society. 
The weakened linkage within the community triggers social disruption like crimes, misogyny, lonely deaths, and suicides. let alone disintegration among people. On the brink of disintegration, the vulnerable people are affected the most. Thus, caring for our neighbors in need must be the priority to restore community spirit. Embracing those who are within the policy blind spot is the irreplaceable aspect in Seoul’s Resilience Strategy.
Seoul has been putting diverse projects spearheaded by welfare policies to secure the social safety of the elderly, the physically challenged, and children who are more susceptible to urban challenges. Seoul did not just provide support for them. We extended our goal to help them be independent and self-sufficient and with more job opportunities. The essence of welfare and care service is not from the administrative perspectives, but more on citizens’, residents’, and people’s voices. Following initiatives, including the flagship Visiting Community Center, are of the citizens, by the citizens, and for the citizens of Seoul.
Goal 2 
Community: 
Stronger and Connected Community
Seoul undertook a comprehensive stakeholder engagement and public consultation to agree on the common idea that mitigating such social disturbance and caring for the needy are the government’s responsibilities, but limiting the discussion to policy is not enough. This means community and its residents must be the core driver aided by governmental policies to empower citizenship. In that context, we themed our second 
Goal, “Community.”
To elevate a sense of community spirit, the Seoul 
Resilience Team proposed four actions. First, 
Seoul will enhance care for the vulnerable people in the by polishing Visiting Community Center programs and launching new projects that put the citizen first. Second, stable housing will be provided not least to vulnerable residents. Third, support for infants and children care will be encouraged, and lastly, social challenges will be worked out through the culture of sharing economy.
14.2%
31.0%
Age of 65 and over
1.39 million
Single-person households
1.18 million
Ave. Life Expectancy
Elderly 
Poverty 
Rate
2008
2016
82.4years
79.6years

[Page 37]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
As of 2017, the number of single-person households accounted for 31% of the total 
3.81 million, displaying a grim truth of weakened social safety net due to our society becoming more nuclear family. To address this issue, Seoul will operate solutions team by districts, and improve the current welfare system, the Hope Welfare Project, by reinforcing public/private partnership. Also, connecting with each resident with one another within the neighborhood, people will form a social connection, thus preventing lonely deaths. Resident-volunteers will visit households of elderly or those with no families to provide one-stop medical service as well as job consultations.
Eliminate lonely deaths & Promote community network
Initiative
Eliminate lonely deaths & Promote community network
Department
Local Welfare and Care Division
Explanation 
Operate solutions team of projects to restore social relationship in neighborhood
Period 
2018-2022
Budget 
4.79 billion KRW
ACTION 1
PROGRAM 6
Strengthen social safety net in all neighborhoods
Connected Neighborhood for the Vulnerable
Visiting Community Center
Seoul established Reaching-out Community 
Service Center, also known as Visiting Community Center, to eradicate welfare dead zones and to deliver more practical welfare benefits to Seoulites. By transforming community service centers from a general administrative organization into welfare service bases that physically visit residents in need, 
Seoul intends to achieve resident integration within communities. Going beyond this, from 2019, residents themselves will be the small “community service” units, and actively be involved in discovering community challenges, welfare dead zones, any discomfort that residents may face.
Dolbom Care Service
Although more and more citizens take the initiatives in the care services by districts, the city government must be responsible for economic, social, and physical care for citizens in need. “Dolbom,” translates to “care” in Korean, is the center of Seoul’s welfare policy. The biggest blindspot of the Dolbom service led by the government was insufficient service providers and that people need to wait a long time for their turn. The level of awareness of the service and its information among the vulnerable groups was significantly low. It is very difficult for these people to have access to the 
Seoul’s vulnerable population is located widely across the metropolis area. Against this backdrop, public welfare and Dolbom services must serve the voices of the people.
Community service centers that are in each district offer access to civic engagement and City services for Seoulites. In the past, people must physically “visit” community service. However, for people who have difficulties to come to centers, the need for social workers to reach out to the households continued to arise. 
Also referred to as the Reaching-out Community Service Center Program, it had its grand opening in July 
2015 to eradicate welfare dead zones and to deliver more practical welfare benefits to the citizens. There remain many welfare dead zones and low-income families in crisis without basic livelihood security. By transforming community service centers from a general administrative organization into welfare service bases that visit residents in need, Seoul plans to address welfare blind spots and provide more practical services that integrate welfare, health and residents’ engagement. 
The average number of social workers reached 6.5 per sub-district to cover diverse groups of people. 
Not only the marginalized, but households that are expecting babies or already have newly born babies can also receive the Dolbom services. To ensure communications and dialogue with other districts, we supported cooperation between community centers in different districts and shared best-practices of Dolbom services. 
Period 
2019-2022
Budget (KRW)
42.78 billion 
Goal 2 Community: Stronger and Connected Community information of possible services or about organizations that provide the service. Furthermore, the administrative process is subdivided into several steps. This multilevel and complicated procedure lowers the usage percentage of the Dolbom service. 
To make sure all citizens have access to necessary services, Seoul will turn the current care service into one-stop customized services, reducing barriers for people with special needs. 
The “Seoul Dolbom SOS Center” will open in 
2019 which offers services from housework to nursing and accompanied hospital visits. The 
Center will be equipped with Dolbom Managers, staff members composed of civil servants in social work and nursing, who will oversee each district to provide professional consultation and housework care services. Also, Emergency Dolbom Service will be launched to help citizens with special needs within 72 hours.
Visiting Community Center 2.0 will start from 2019, envisioning the value that “We look into every corner of Seoul” to revitalize the neighborhood and maximize our assistance tools so that every community has access to the care it needs. We will stimulate village projects, especially in under-served areas through a public-private partnership.
Shocks and stresses
Poverty, lonely deaths, spiking suicide rate, Indifference to our neighbor
Resilience goal
Any policy blind spot will be eliminated by fostering care service led by residents for our vulnerable neighbors who are at the heart of welfare service.
Department
Welfare Policy Division, Local Autonomy Administration Division
Partner(s)
Districts, Volunteer Service Center, Social Enterprises Association in districts
Visiting Community 
Service Center
SUPPORTING ACTIONS
SUPPORTING ACTIONS

[Page 38]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
ACTION 1
ACTION 2
Stable and Affordable Housing for All
Public Housing for the Physically 
Challenged Citizens
Thus, five additional public housings for the physically challenged neighbors to support their independence will be built every year to reach the total number of 100 units by 
2022. The City will conduct yearly surveys to identify who wishes to leave the facilities for the disabled. The 20 public housings for the physically challenged will be expanded to 
260 units by 2022. The basic housing service will be provided to citizens aged over 18 living in Seoul with disabilities.
Housing for the Elderly
Housing support for the elderly will be expanded to 160 houses by 2022. Areas of 
Community Center within 10-minute Reach
Seoul is currently pursuing the community regeneration project to enable access of community centers within the 10 minutes from the neighborhood. That way, more jobs suited for the local community will be discovered, and several projects driven from the community will boost the local economy.
Furthermore, living facilities like parking lots, study centers, and senior centers for the residents’ emotional, cultural and physical engagement will be increased, and most of aged vacant houses will be remodeled.
Vacant Housing Regeneration Project
In order to secure more housing spaces for people, Seoul will purchase 1,000 unoccupied buildings by 2022 to use them as public 
Stable housing, along with a stable job, is the basis for civil resilience. Currently, supplying more housing and relative support service is needed for physically chalCurrently, of Seoul’s low-rise buildings designated for maintenance, about 35% is over thirty years. As mentioned earlier, a stable housing environment gives a basic living standard for 
Period 
2019-2022
Budget (KRW)
53.31 billion 
Period 
2019-2022
Budget (KRW)
1.36 trillion 
Expand housing support for the vulnerable populations
Enable citizen-customized housing welfare
Goal 2 Community: Stronger and Connected Community
PROGRAM 7 support will cover safety management, emergency response, health care, diverse human rights concerns, as well as housework. As we enter a new phase of an aging society, elderly care will make headway in creating favorable climates for near a quarter of our population.
Homeless Shelters
Furthermore, Seoul will provide more shelters for homeless people to reach 288 by 2022. 
Helping the homeless land a job and be free from substance abuse, professionals and social workers will be meeting with homeless people regularly to help them recover self-confidence and personal dignity. The City will guide them to make a fresh start.
rental housing so that an estimated 4,000 households will receive benefits.
To stabilize youth employment and housing, 
Seoul will team up with local youth communities to create start-up spaces and provide public rentals for newlyweds and youth. 
Private companies that undertake the renovation of vacant buildings will be financially supported. By 2022, Seoul plans to embark on the 235 housing maintenance projects for small-sized residential buildings led by private companies and the Seoul Housing & Communities Corporation. By doing so, citizens’ residential areas will be cleaner and more convenient by transforming marginalized neighborhoods into places for urban regeneration projects. lenged people and the elderly. Because the demand for housing differs by everyone, customized services for priority groups are needed. 
Seoulites, which means expanding Seoul’s residential welfare to provide systemic support for the marginalized who cannot afford housing is the key to enhance resilience for its citizens.
Shocks and stresses
Physically challenged, elderly, homeless people in poverty, lonely deaths 
Resilience goal
Enhance self-reliance of the housing vulnerable through stable housing environment and strengthen their ability to integrate into our society
Department
Disability Policy Division, Senior Citizen Support Division, Self-reliance Support Division, Housing Policy Division
Partner(s)
Volunteer Service Center, civil organizations
Shocks and stresses
Conflicts in regeneration area among stakeholders, lack of public housing, income disparity
Resilience goal
Marginalized neighborhoods will benefit from the housing regeneration project led by resident-community.
Department
Residential Redevelopment Division, Residential Environment 
Improvement Division, Housing Renewal Project Division, Public 
Housing Division
Partner(s)
Community, Local architecture activists, youth organizations
Seoul will incorporate diverse ideas collected through surveys by residents including eco-friendly activities, education and culture sharing projects, and residents networking programs into solving community problems.
Community programs were limited to public rental housings. Now, Seoul plans to expand the range of its programs to PPPs, private-owned housing, social housing, and residential areas. 
Also, residents are given opportunities to apply for topics for community programs, and when selected, they will be supported financially in the operation. The City will provide funds to run the program and to nurture experts in community solutions.
Promote community programs for rental housing
Vitalize public communal housing
Initiative support for management of public communal housing community program for rental housing
Department
Public Housing 
Division
Housing Supply 
Division
Explanation 
Guarantee transparency in public housing, Revive community spirit in public town houses
Support community program projects
Period 
2019-2022
Budget 
6.32 billion KRW
2019-2022
1.96 billion KRW
SUPPORTING ACTIONS
SUPPORTING ACTIONS

[Page 39]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
ACTION 1
Childbirth and Childcare Service
At the end of 2017, Seoul provided public nurseries three times more than other cities, reaching a 31.5% enrollment rate; however, the number of public care centers across Seoul still lags behind demand. To fulfill these aspirations, Seoul will increase 
100 additional facilities every year from 
Period 
2018-2022
Budget (KRW)
405.5 billion 
Expand public nurseries
Goal 2 Community: Stronger and Connected Community
PROGRAM 8
2019 to 2022 to reach 50% of the attendance rate, which is equivalent to 110,000 children. Furthermore, district disparities will be alleviated by equally distributing the facilities in every district with using big-data analysis and standards tailored to regions.
Between 2013 and 2017, the housing prices went up 10.9%, not least from polarization in the housing market. The “housing crisis” within young generation has intensified, and the rising rent prices prompted a record exodus from Seoul among people in their thirties. Unaffordable housing is also a major factor for people to delay or give up marriage and childbirth.
Lack of affordable housing undermines the stability of Seoulites and erodes the resilience of the City in the longer term. Recognizing this context began the project of expanding 
Seoul’s public rental housing.
With the rise of single-person households and the aging population, trends in public rental housing are also changing. 
In line with the changing perception, the 
City has provided over 80,000 public rental housing units to vulnerable housing groups over the past five years. By investing 1.14 trillion KRW in attaining stable housing for the youth and low-income populations, 
Seoul reached the goal of providing a total of 105,770 houses in five years from 2012 to 
2016, much ahead of time by 130%.
The public rental housing project shifted away from merely providing enough units to creating consumer-tailored rental housing. 
A total of 1,819 customized rental housing units, equivalent to 2,364 households, were supplied as Start-up Housing for young entrepreneurs, Safe Medical Housing for seniors and patients, Safe Women Housing for women with an enhanced security system, Lone 
Seniors Housing for seniors who live alone, and Artist Coop that allows artists to focus on their artistic endeavors.
Additionally, Seoul is undertaking innovative actions including a zero-energy housing complex in Nowon district, modular homes and public housing for young theater actors to meet the demands of diversified groups. 
Working with Seoul REITs (Real Estate Invest 
Trust), public-private partnered investment companies specializing in real estate investment, Seoul will provide 20,000 private rental housing units. To address the high demand for small-scale houses for two or three persons, the initiative will focus on small-sized housing complexes within the range of 25 to 
60 sq meter.
Increased Public Rental 
Housing Units
Shocks and stresses
Imbalanced service between public and private childcare center, women’s career breaks
Resilience goal
Guarantee childcare services to those who need the most within each district.
Department
Childcare Division
Partner(s)
Seoul Foundation of Women and Family, District offices

[Page 40]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
ACTION 2
Visiting Maternity and Child Care Service
Seoul will incrementally increase the number of visiting nurses to 280 by 2022 as part of the helper service for pregnant women and newborn babies. Also, to high-risk patients and pregnant women, we will deliver a home visitation diet consulting to provide nutritional and medical therapy. Furthermore, voluntary social network among new mothers will be organized for early detection of postnatal depression and to promote a healthy nurturing environment for mothers.
Seoulites are postponing childbirth and are having fewer of them, leading to the lowest birth rate of 0.84 in 2017. Building prenatal and postnatal service and childcare infrastructure have become a domiPeriod 
2018-2022
Budget (KRW)
286.6 billion 
Broaden childbirth and childcare support
Post-natal Helper Service for Households with Newborn Child
Currently, Seoul provides the helper service for mothers and newborn babies to low-income families. Seoul will broaden this support to all households with newborn babies by 2022. In line with this arrangement, more postpartum helpers will be trained and recruited to improve the quality of the service.
nant issue in welfare. Thus, comprehensive and systemic support is needed including lowering medical expenses for infants and children.
Goal 2 Community: Stronger and Connected Community
Shocks and stresses
Post-natal depression, uneven pattern of welfare benefits for infants and high-risk mothers
Resilience goal
Facilitate before, during, and after childbirth services for highrisk mothers and infants in low-income households to address low-fertility crisis.
Department
Public Health Division, Family Division
Partner(s)
Healthy Family Support Center
Seoul aims to subsidize all childcare expenses after 2019, reaching free childcare for all children in Seoul. Furthermore, by extending operation hours in private daycare centers to late-night or even holidays. To achieve a free childcare system, by 2022, all public daycare centers will be mandatory to extend their working hours, and night owl childcare centers will be increased to at least one per district.
When a child enters elementary school, it is another time for mothers to enter the 
2nd career break. Thus, afterschool care centers are in high demand. Seoul plans to increase 400 additional afterschool centers by 2022 so there won’t be any waitlisted children. Also, Our Neighborhood Kium Centers, another name for a childcare center, will be increased and hire more childcare experts. Lastly, Seoul will continuously nurture 1,000 additional childcare experts every year to assist households with working parents.
Lessen childcare burdens
Expand early childhood care services
Initiative
Lessen childcare burdens
Expand early childhood care services
Department
Childcare 
Division, After 
School Support 
Division
After School 
Support Division
Explanation 
Operate daycare center after hours and increase teachers
Increase Our Neighborhood 
Kium Centers, nurture additional parenting experts
Period 
2018-2022
Budget 
289.2 billion 
KRW
2018-2022
694.16 billion 
KRW
SUPPORTING ACTIONS
SUPPORTING ACTIONS

[Page 41]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
ACTION 1
ACTION 2
Seoul tries to encourage public resources to be distributed to its citizens. Such a principle will be better by combination of both public-private resources. Shortage of parking space is an everyday occurrence for 
Seoulites that can undermine the quality of residents’ life. 
Thus, Seoul will promote “priority parking areas” to help residents park closer to their homes and reassure all districts to adopt it. 
Period 
2019-2022
Budget (KRW)
1.4 billion 
Boost PPPs for the sharing economy
PROGRAM 9
Furthermore, the public-private governance with shared businesses, Seoul Metropolitan Office of Education, and universities will create job opportunities in the field of school facilities management. Developing visiting programs to shared services companies and creating citizen and teenager-oriented activities will allow Seoulites to enjoy the new and innovative culture.
Seoul’s public bike system, Ttareungyi, was launched to alleviate environmental problems including air pollution and traffic congestion. This public bike, which can be rented and paid for using the mobile app Seoul Bike, has been growing in popularity. Without needing to register, people can purchase a daily ticket using mobile phone.
About 99% of the survey respondents said the Ttareungyi service should be more widely used by other citizens. 
Because Ttareungyi can be easily located in citizens’ residential area nearby subway stations, bus stations, and residential areas, it is highly accessible. Seoul will not only increase the number of racks but add more safety programs to improve the culture of using bicycles. This will ensure a solid ground for mobility infrastructure and that people can use Ttareungyi more conveniently and safely.
Innovative Solutions in Community
Seoul will run diverse “Local Labs” within the city to detect any social concerns and form a solution team consist of citizens, the public, experts, and local businesses to fix the problems. After test-driving first in the underdeveloped region where social cohesion is relatively well established, this project will be expanded to other districts. 
The range of operation will vary from senior care to renewable energy, associated by local activists and professionals. 
Period 
2019-2022
Budget (KRW)
200 million 
Operate “Local Labs” to foster innovative solutions
Goal 2 Community: Stronger and Connected Community
Once we discover a few best practices, the project will be applied to other Seoul districts. Also, if needed, local activists will be financially supported for their work and the residents’ committee will also be encouraged to take part in this.
Shocks and stresses
Diverse community problems including poverty, energy, disintegrated community
Resilience goal
Provide opportunity for citizens, the public, experts, and local businesses to discuss regional problems together and draw solutions
Department
City Transition Division
Partner(s)
Local Autonomy Committee, Local Community, regional activists
Shocks and stresses
Lack of resources, inefficient usage of resources, residents’ indifference and lack of voluntary cooperation
Resilience goal
Promote the culture of sharing among private stakeholders from government-driven public policies
Department
Social Innovation Division
Partner(s)
Local community, local activists, Local Autonomy Committee, 
Universities and educational institutes
Seoul Bike 
Sharing, 
Ttareungyi

[Page 42]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
GOAL 3
INCLUSIVE GROWTH: 
Prosperous Seoul for All
Direction
Resilient growth
Inclusive and equitable city
More opportunities for the vulnerable
Challenge
Unequal distribution
Unfair employment opportunities
Outcome
Inclusive society where vulnerable groups have equal and fair access to economic opportunities

[Page 43]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
Halve the tuition at the University of Seoul to help students explore career path for their future.
Create more policies for youth resilience.
To address income disparity, Seoul was the first city to adopt this initiative to improve quality of life and livelihood of low-income workers.
Guarantee employment security in the public sectors.
Create funds to support the youth help them be financially independent and invest in their dreams.
Evaluate the risks for a new business and marketing information through big-data analysis.
Provide customized consultation to prospective business owners or those who opened business less than one year.
Support 1:1 consultation by experts on marketing, advertisement, store management, accounting, etc.
Half-price tuition at 
University of Seoul
Major Initiatives
Youth Platform
Basic Livelihood Security
Zero irregular employment at public institutions
Future fund for youth
Analyzing commercial districts
1:1 Startup Consultation
Consultation for the selfemployed
Seoul aims to construct an economy that gives diverse opportunities and resilient potential for the vulnerable groups and pursues fairness for all Seoulites. To achieve our aspirations, Seoul will focus on customized support for the selected five groups: the youth, the 50+ generation, microbusinesses, vulnerable labor workers, and entities of the social economy to ensure a society that will bear fruit for all Seoulites.
When we refer to a “disaster,” the first things that come to mind are physical disasters like earthquakes and floods. However, in the broader perspective, the economic prosperity is the prerequisite in establishing long-term urban resilience. 
In the face of a physical disaster, the damage is rapidly escalated into adverse longer-term consequences if economic structure is very susceptible, and the environmentally marginalized citizens are impacted the most from the disaster. Thus, having a sound and reliable economy is the way to minimize any possible short- or long-term impact from high-risk hazards and protect the vulnerable, striving for equitable growth for all.
The current state of our economy, however, does not look good. The persistent low growth rate is intrinsically linked to the unemployment rate hitting an all-time high, weakening Seoul’s growth engine. On top of low growth potential, the city’s economic polarization is intensifying, leaving less room for equitable distribution of resources. For this reason, assuring a fair economy is the all-out priority for every Seoulites to prosper from inclusive growth.
Seoul has implemented an employment security policy, allowing all Seoulites to thrive together. Irregular workers in public institutions were turned into regular workers, and labor-related measures were adopted to protect vulnerable workers whose labor rights are easily denied. Seoul’s efforts were well reflected in its projects for youth and the 50+ generations. Furthermore, education programs and services were provided for microbusiness owners and their economic independence. To those who experienced business failure and have done nothing wrong ethically, Seoul strengthened the social safety net for their second chances.
Goal 3
Inclusive Growth: 
Prosperous Seoul for All | Resilient SEOUL | 
Sewoon Mart Arcade
One of Seoul’s oldest commercial and residential buildings is newly redeveloped into lend spaces for ventures and innovators

[Page 44]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
ACTION 1
ACTION 2
Sluggish economic growth left 97,000 young Seoulites jobless, recording an unemployment rate of 10.2% in the second quarter of 2018. Thus, Seoul will take the 
New Deal Employment project to the next level and have the private sectors join to provide diverse opportunities for youth prior to being recruited. The New Deal 
Employment started in 2013, has created 
15,000 positions by 2017 and the employment rate upon completion of the course reached 52.9% in 2017.
Period 
2018-2022
Budget (KRW)
921 billion 
Develop New Deal Job to create private job opportunities
PROGRAM 10
In conjunction with the commitment by the public sector, Seoul will expand the area of associate institutions to the government research institutes, business associations, and college career centers to broaden the spectrum of the people who receive benefits. 
To settle this project as a new successful model for young job seekers, Seoul will invite more universities to connect the New 
Deal project with companies that provide more internship and will propose a customized recruiting process for promising SMEs.
Youth Welfare and Jobs
As of 2019, the youth unemployment rate has reached 10.1%. High unemployment rate leaves the youth population vulnerable to social isolation. To cover for those without job, thus do not hold employment insurance, Seoul launched Youth Allowance project in 2016 to financially support young job seekers. By 2018, a total of 
12,000 people received benefit and 7,000 more to come in 2019. 
Employment rate of the participants of Youth Allowance in 2017
Period 
2019~
Budget (KRW)
9.6 billion 
Realize Seoul-specific youth welfare system
Goal 3 Inclusive Growth: Prosperous Seoul for All
A survey tells about half of beneficiaries of 
Youth Allowance was able to work in the field as they wished,
Seoul will also include 1,000 more people who are eligible for receiving benefits from the “Youth Account,” which started in 
2017, as well as financial consultations for youth. Besides the policy, other cultural and welfare programs like workshops, seminars, plays, and movies will be arranged.
Shocks and stresses
Unemployment, economic disparity, polarization
Resilience goal
Facilitate prosperity of youth resilience through Youth Dividend and 
Youth Support programs.
Department
Youth Policy Center, Local Welfare & Care Division
Partner(s)
Seoul Youth Guarantee Center, Welfare foundations
Shocks and stresses
Unemployment, economic disparity, polarization, job insecurity
Resilience goal
Provide high-quality job opportunities by connecting youth and excellent enterprises.
Department
Economic Policy Division, Youth Policy Center
Partner(s)
Seoul Forum, Seoul Business Agency
Seoul will create an innovative ecosystem for start-ups in Korea University, 
Kwangwoon University, Chung-Ang University, and Sejong University, which will be funded with 10 billion KRW over the next four years. These universities will be able to provide training programs for starting new business and fostering entrepreneurship. For a start-up friendly environment, Seoul will create a College 
Start-up Hub Task Force to establish a shared platform with private and global players.
To draw viable startup policies, Seoul’s current employment support programs will be more accessible and consumer-focused. As of August 2018, there are about 532 promising Seoul-type SMEs in Seoul, and young job seekers will be able to have access to their recruitment plan and their status in the job market as well.
From September 2019, Seoul will widen the opportunities for job seekers to actually visit SMEs and experience on-site job interviews.
Foster local universities as testbeds for start-ups
Match best SMEs with young job seekers
Initiative
Foster local universities as testbeds for start-ups
Match best 
SMEs with young job seekers
Department
Campus Town 
Revitalization 
Division
Employment 
Policy Division
Explanation 
Promote start-ups by college students through providing incentives to universities
Connect job seekers to 
SMEs
Period 
2019~
Budget 
278.8 billion KRW
2019~
120 million KRW
Employed
Unemployed
Started own business
Creative activities
38.7%
52.8%
2.1%
6.4%
SUPPORTING ACTIONS
SUPPORTING ACTIONS

[Page 45]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
Among the city governments in Korea, Seoul was the first to launch a Youth Autonomy Council to expand the role of youth in the legislative process in March 2019. Not only do they discover and propose a political agenda, the young generations are also part of the budgeting process to engage in diverse solutions on the overall governance of the Seoul Metropolitan Government
Over the past six years, Seoul has identified and designed various flagship actions through the youth governance, of which the “Youth Dividend” and “Youth Hope Fund” are considered very successful.
Seoul’s Youth Autonomy Council is divided into two major pillars: the Seoul Youth Policy Network, a youth-led policy making program, and the Youth Policy Center, the administrative organization under the Mayor’s office. After the Seoul 
Youth Policy Network discovers the areas of interest and allocates budgets accordingly, the proposed bills go through the consent and approval process at the Seoul Metropolitan Council, which then get executed at Youth Policy Center. In other words, once considered mayor’s sole authority is 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
Youth Autonomy Council given to the hands of the youth who will benefit directly from Seoul’s youth policies.
The Seoul Youth Policy Network, launched in 
2013, has held regular meetings, convening 
1,570 young Seoulites to involve in the formulation and implementation of youth-oriented approaches. Specifically, it conducted 170 open discussions, initiated 98 projects, and developed 
162 policy agendas for youth. 
The selected agenda was adopted as a new initiative at the “Youth Autonomy Council,” went through a budget screening process by the 
Seoul Metropolitan Council and finally became an official project. The Youth Autonomy Council, which is an annual event since 2015, is recognized as an exemplary case for cooperative governance. It is an integrated decision-making organization led by the City government, the 
City council, and the youth to delve into creating a more inclusive future.
Goal 3 Inclusive Growth: Prosperous Seoul for All

[Page 46]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
ACTION 1
Employment Opportunities for the Elderly 
Goal 3 Inclusive Growth: Prosperous Seoul for All
PROGRAM 11
As life expectancies edge up every year, we are the first in human history to face the era of the centenarian, a person who lives to the age of 100 years. The 50 plus generations refer to the people aged between 
50 and 64 who are retired from their work, but not yet categorized as “seniors.” Represented by baby boomers, this generation accounts for 21.9% of the Seoul population, the largest group of all with new generational traits and needs. The 50+ generations are better educated and financially well off than the middle-aged generations in the past; however, the super-slow economic growth rate deters their children from getting new jobs, which means more expenses than income for the 50+. Also, as the society is aging, they would have to wait much longer after retirement until they start receiving the pension benefits. Thus, the 50+ generation needs social support and can contribute to our society at the same time. They should be considered as an unprecedented generation of opportunity and resources, not as a burden. The 50+ generation is the key to solve inter-generational tensions and be a new model for our great second life.
Period 
2019~
Budget (KRW)
226 trillion
Expand more opportunities for the Elderly
Shocks and stresses
Aging society, unemployment, economic disparity, polarization
Resilience goal
Support the capacity of the 50+ generation to be re-employed and utilize the resources in solving local problems.
Department
Post-Retirement Support Division
Partner(s)
The 50+ Foundation, Korea Labor Force Development Institute for the Aged, Korea Association of Community Senior Club
In 2018, the elderly and retired population who were re-employed was estimated to hit 67,943 persons and we plan to raise this number to 75,544 in 2019. Also, with the increase in the paid volunteer jobs, “Boram” jobs, about 2,500 elderly and the middle-aged people found new jobs in 
2019, up 264 from 2,236 in 2018. 
The 50+ Internship programs that included 100 people in 2018 will embrace 150 people in 2019 and the participants will vary from NGOs, social enterprises, cooperative unions, local businesses, and SMEs to provide in-depth understanding of the particular task.
Seoul will establish the “50+ Job Masterplan” and operate it in 2019 to develop longer-term employment & start-up model that is sustainable and fit for job trends for the elderly and the middle-aged.
Seoul will develop the 50+ infrastructure to mobilize resources and create a customized 50+ job model. By 2021, the 50+ campus, a post-school for the 50+ generation preparing for new life transitions, will increase to six campuses, and consumer-tailored education programs will be developed. To 19 districts without campuses, new centers will be built.
The 50+ generation can provide good resources of Seoul and be helpful to especially marginalized groups. Through pro-bono activity of the 50+ generation, we can expect positive welfare effects. The 50+ Volunteer Groups will support single-person households, multicultural families, and the elderly on financial education, academic help for non-Korean students, housing developments, and lots of other benefits in areas where the 50+ generation have specialties in.
A select few with experience of running their own business will provide tips and know-hows to local microbusiness owners who are going through difficulties. They will go through quarter-by-quarter business consultations and in-depth analysis of the outlook of the market.
Increase infrastructure to support the 
50+
Support local microbusinesses
Recognize social contribution of the 
50+
SUPPORTING ACTIONS

[Page 47]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
The 100-year life, which has now become our reality, poses new challenges to our society. The journey to our increased life expectancy demands for new perceptions and changes in perspectives. The 50 Plus Foundation supports this new generation in search of new life paths and address challenges ahead. 
The foundation hopes to cause a small wave of change that promises to bring a better future. 
Established as the first of its kind in Korea to support the 50+ generation plan for their future, 
Seoul intended to create a second life vision for them as they are our society’s new opportunity and important social capital. 
Thus, shifting in perception to view the elderly in a different image is needed. The foundation is preparing diverse consultations for the retired 50+ and utilizes the resources that the 50+ generation possesses through social participation and sharing experiences with youth. This 
50+ policy initiative was selected as a case study by the OECD in the area of Inclusiveness and vulnerable populations.
SUPPORTING 
ACTIONS
Initiative
Increase infrastructure to support the 50+
Recognize social contribution of the 50+
Support local microbusinesses
Department
Post-Retirement 
Support Division
Post-Retirement 
Support Division
Labor and Livelihood Security 
Policy Bureau
Explanation 
Increase the 50+ Campus and the 50+ Centers
Support pro-bono services and operate the 50+ volunteer service
Consult microbusinesses with financial difficulties
Period 
2019-2021
Budget 
50 billion KRW
2019-2022
83.08 billion KRW
2019-2022
The 50+ Foundation

[Page 48]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
ACTION 1
Microbusiness and the Self-employed
Widen the social safety net for microbusinesses
Goal 3 Inclusive Growth: Prosperous Seoul for All
PROGRAM 12
Period 
2018-2022
Budget (KRW)
27.34 billion
Shocks and stresses
Poverty, unemployment, business closure, crisis of the self-employed
Resilience goal
Support microbusiness owners financially for the second chance in case their businesses ended up in failure. 
Department
Small Business Policy Division
Partner(s)
The 50+ foundation, Seoul Credit Guarantee Foundation
People who are running small businesses are more exposed to risks. Uncertainties facing microbusinesses can be weak business continuity, or a possibility for closing down their businesses. Thus providing a social safety net for these people is needed. 
Seoul will subsidize 30% of monthly insurance fees whose sales are below a certain amount. Furthermore, the beneficiaries supported by the “Yellow Umbrella Mutual 
Aid Fund” will be extended to newly registered microbusiness owners with annual sales below 200 million KRW who will be provided 20,000 KRW every month since 
2019. 
People whose businesses were closed down and had no problem ethically will gain a second chance to take the next leap. By 2022, 10,000 microbusiness owners who had to close their business will be eased from financial burdens through debt relief program.
Long-term receivables will be purchased by the Korea Asset Management Corporation, and recipients of basic livelihood grants will be covered up to 90% of the original costs. 
The current number of 15 experts who provided consultation on legal disputes such as rental costs, taxation, labor and so on will increase to 25, so that people running a small business can reach out to get help anytime they want.
By connecting with the 50+ foundation, the self-employed and microbusiness community can get psychological consultations and career searching programs when they close their business. “Hope Camp” will give them opportunities to look for the second path and a stable economic foundation.
Microbusiness accounts for 83% of the total businesses of Seoul and 28% of the total number of workers, forming the backbone of Seoul’s economy. Breaking it down by sector, wholesale and retail businesses are 29%, restaurant and accommodations businesses are 17%, and services are 7%, meaning most of them are directly related to the livelihood of the business owners. 
Persistent recession and surging rental expenses and credit card fees may aggravate profit, leading to the “crisis of the self-employed” that numerous microbusiness owners and the self-employed may end up closing down their businesses. Therefore, the Seoul Metropolitan Government adopted Zero-Pay to mitigate fee burdens for small business owners and will expand the benefits.

[Page 49]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
ACTION 2 “Zero-Pay” is a convenient payment service to lower settlement fees to zero for small business owners, joined by the 
Seoul 
Metropolitan 
Government, the central government, local districts, financial companies, and private payment companies. Zero-Pay is a direct transaction system where the money is transferred during the purchase from a consumer’s account to a seller’s account through the 
QR code with smartphones. The retailers with sales less than 800 million KRW the previous year do not have to pay any transaction fee, and the consumers will receive 40% of an income tax deduction as well as other discounts. 
Thus, having more retailers that provide 
Zero-Pay services is very important. Since 
2019, the registration process that was 
Period 
2019~
Budget (KRW)
3.87 billion 
Encourage using Zero-Pay
Goal 3 Inclusive Growth: Prosperous Seoul for All once limited to paper form is now available online through PCs or tablet PCs, and the process will much shorter from 2-3 weeks to within five days. Furthermore, diverse payment including business operating expenses and public funding were able to be paid with Zero-Pay starting from April 
2019.
To encourage more people to use ZeroPay, Seoul will discount the utilization fee for public facilities and enable Zero-Pay application for public transportation.
For wider usage, within the second half of 
2019, the contactless NFC payment, which is more convenient than QR codes, will be adapted to create a better payment setting for consumers.
Shocks and stresses
Economic disparity, polarization
Resilience goal
By reducing the commission fee for Zero-Pay, both consumers and the franchise stores will be free from financial burden.
Department
Zero Pay Committee
Partner(s)
K-Bank, Payco, Kiosk Association, Korea Financial Telecommunications and Clearing Institute
The Comprehensive Support Platform for Microbusiness, an integrated plan of finance and management to help microbusiness be self-sufficient, will be launched in 5 branches of the Seoul Credit Guarantee Foundation and will be incorporated into all districts by 2025.
Also, mom-and-pop stores will be linked with local young artists for art marketing to help microbusiness. By combining art and interior, “Arterior” project will be practiced in all 25 districts in 500 stores to connect with 150 local artists.
Seoul will help microbusinesses to thrive in a resilient and sustainable business ecosystem supported by big-data analysis. The City will provide the data about the 1,742 existing commercial areas and 260 additional special tourist zones and conventional market areas and adopt real-time Chatbot service in January 2019. 
This big-data system will provide risk factors of opening business in certain areas, expected sales, floating populations, and residing populations to give customized marketing strategy. Those who have completed the consulting service are eligible for loans up to 50 million KRW.
Provide institutional support for microbusinesses
Foster promising start-ups using big-data analysis
Initiative
Provide institutional support for microbusinesses
Foster promising start-ups using big-data analysis
Department
Small Business 
Policy Division
Small Business 
Policy Division
Explanation 
Create a platform for comprehensive support for microbusiness
Create a sustainable ecosystem for the self-employed business
Period 
2018-2022
Budget 
20 billion KRW
2018-2022
12.48 billion KRW
SUPPORTING ACTIONS
SUPPORTING ACTIONS

[Page 50]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
Goal 3 Inclusive Growth: Prosperous Seoul for All
PROGRAM 13
Respect for Labor
Of all the workers in Seoul, 33.9% are temporary workers and employed under a special employment arrangement. The labor market has become more polarized and most of the labor unions in Korea are organized in large companies with more than 300 employees, which leaves behind 73 thousand of workers in vulnerable areas. Thus, separate labor organizations in support with local communities to protect their rights are needed.
Though workplace accidents are repeatedly occurring, we do not have countermeasures to tackle industrial accidents, resulting in 50 deaths yearly. A term “outsourcing the danger” has newly coined in our society that temporary workers are involuntarily forced to work in more hazardous tasks. Therefore, we need a new labor safety plan specific to 
Seoul’s labor conditions to reduce the number of casualties in work-related accidents.
Furthermore, as of 2017, Korean employees worked 2,024 hours on average, 265 hours more than the OECD average and ranked second from the top. As the culture of overwork damages productivity, Seoul plans to run “Less Working Hours” model to limit the workweek to 40 hours, 1,800 hours annually. 
ACTION 1
Period 
2018-2022
Budget (KRW)
400 million 
Guarantee the rights of vulnerable workers
Seoul upholds the three basic rights for the vulnerable labor workers and encourages them to form labor unions for mail delivery agents, designated drivers, and fast delivery persons. Also, Seoul will provide spaces and legal consultation for the associations as well as education and network programs with other unions.
The overall labor union participation rate is stagnated at 10% range in Korea. Thus, 
Seoul will operate the labor committee to represent the rights of labor workers and to serve the interests of workers, especially vulnerable workers such as temporary workers. By studying labor cases in other countries like Austria, Germany, and Luxemburg, we will come up with resolutions specifically fit for Seoul.
Shocks and stresses
Polarization, economic disparity, aggravated labor environment, weak social safety net
Resilience goal
Create a labor environment where all workers efforts will be paid off.
Department
Labor Policy Division
Partner(s)
Ministry of Employment and Labor, Seoul Metropolitan Office of Education
Korea’s industrial accidents and deaths are two to three times that of other OECD countries. In Korea, Seoul ranked second after Gyeonggi Province. Therefore, by the end of 2019, Seoul plans to design the implementation plan and preventative targets of industrial accidents with the purpose to halve the number of industrial deaths by 2022. By dispatching Labor Safety Inspector, safety guideline will be prepared for the five most common industrial accidents, and the standards will be strengthened through the Labor Safety Committee. 
Among outsourced work in the private sectors, that which is considered of public concern will be turned into regular work. Also, excessive hiring of irregular workers will be discouraged, and a screening process will be mandatory when it is necessary to hire irregular workers.
Furthermore, through a trial operation by Seoul Credit Guarantee Foundation, Seoul will develop a model for 1,800 hours of average annual working hours.
Create safer labor environment
Turn non-regular workers into regular workers, Reduce working hours, 
Increase wages
Initiative
Create safer labor environment
Turn non-regular workers to regular workers, reduce working hours, increase wages
Department
Labor Policy 
Division
Labor Policy 
Division
Explanation 
Create Industrial Safety 
Master Plan and operate labor safety inspector program
Propose zero irregular workers in the public sector and reduce working hours
Period 
2018-2022
Budget 
250 million KRW
2019~
1.63 billion KRW
SUPPORTING ACTIONS
SUPPORTING ACTIONS

[Page 51]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
As one of the Seoul Metropolitan Government’s policies for labor-management, the cooperation selects one or two worker representatives and appoints them as non-executive directors to participate in board meetings. 
This system enables labor-management relations to reduce conflicts and take a step towards positive communication and coexistence, further laying the groundwork for management innovation and economic growth. The European Parliament and Davos 
Forum also acknowledge the positive effects of the initiative.
As social conflict in Korea has caused severe economic losses, conflicts between social classes and between labor and management are significant factors in need of urgent improvement. By introducing Workers Participation in Management, Seoul was determined to minimize confrontational labor relations, realize transparent management through checks and balances by worker’s participation, and improve enforceability and drive management innovation.
For stable operation, opinions of interested parties and experts will be collected to form the public consensus and establish and implement the system.
Workers 
Participation in 
Management

[Page 52]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
ACTION 1
Goal 3 Inclusive Growth: Prosperous Seoul for All
PROGRAM 14
Expansion of Social Economy
Period 
2019-2020
Budget (KRW)
3 billion 
Support Social Enterprises and Cooperatives
Shocks and stresses
Economic disparity, polarization, demographic changes, aging population
Resilience goal
Expand the scope of SIB into the field of youth unemployment to provide more benefits to low-income households
Department
Social Enterprises Support Division
Partner(s)
Ministry of the Interior and Safety
The social economy is a way of ushering positive changes throughout Seoul to address social concerns, including low-growth trap, social polarization, and aging population. 
Every social enterprise created makes substantial headway in increasing social value and well-being of the community. Seoul boasts a burgeoning social economy that the total revenue doubled since its beginning in 2012. However, public awareness and the level of sufficiency need more room for improvement. Therefore, we need a regional strategy to leverage the social economy to maximize inclusive growth.
As the very first city in Asia to adopt the 
Social Impact Bond (SIB) to the field of child welfare, Seoul not only serves as a breakthrough model to solve welfare problems but also encourages the citizens and other cities to participate in minimizing the expenditure of public finances. When the first project is completed in August 2019, we will evaluate its outcome and begin the second project. If the project is successful, of the 1 billion KRW of total investment, 
321 million KRW will be granted. 
The next project will be designed to solve youth unemployment problems to provide aides to low-income youth aged between 
19 and 34. Five hundred young people will be given customized programs for their career for three years. The agency will analyze the employment rate every year and provide incentives accordingly. When this project is settled down, the subject for the following projects will vary from birthrate, senior care, low-income families, and universal welfare system.
Seoul Social Venture Hub Center near Seolleung Station will open in 2019 to provide space for venture incubation and consultations for skills development, commercialization, and legal advice for 50 social venture companies. Through the Social Venture Accelerating Program, socially innovative companies will be fostered, and 42 social venture companies will receive customized consultation. 
Through PPPs with SK Social Entrepreneurship Studies, Seoul will subsidize 50 million KRW per company that went through the Social Impact Bond program.
Seoul will help to find new entrants of the social economy and develop a business model in the apartment complex in order to expand the social economic participation of the inhabitants and to open the market. Residents themselves will develop a path for other residents to participate as consumers, investors and entrepreneurs of the social economy, address community problems, and support up to 200 million 
KRW for three years.
In addition, a permanent offline market platform with a total of 140 companies including social ventures, regional cooperatives, and youth businessmen in the field of culture and arts will promote the social economic representative brand market. From 
April to June every year, Seoul will host new value-added markets and outdoor events such as Ttukseom and Gwangjin Bridge every Friday and Saturday.
Support youth social entrepreneurship and investment
Foster resident engagement in social economy
Initiative
Support youth social entrepreneurship and investment
Foster resident engagement in social economy
Department
Social Enterprises Support 
Division
Social Enterprises Support 
Division
Explanation 
Promote PPPs to nurture social ventures
Discover agenda for economic community and propose brand markets for local residents
Period 
2018-2022
Budget 
4.7 billion KRW
2019~
1.7 billion KRW
SUPPORTING ACTIONS
SUPPORTING ACTIONS

[Page 53]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
Seoul proclaimed its Sharing City Seoul project on September 20, 2012, along with an implementation plan that ensures people to practice the culture of sharing in their lives. Seoul sees the Sharing City Seoul project as social innovation designed to create new economic opportunities, restore solid relationships, and reduce the wasting of resources to resolve urban economic, social, and environmental problems altogether.
Furthermore, Seoul is set to make headways in other policies that will respect and promote private-sector capabilities, as well as strategies that require the public sector to open their resources for citizens.
Sharing allows us to gain more benefit with the limited resource since it enhances its usability. Therefore, the government can provide more services to the citizens with a smaller budget. New types of jobs will be created since ICT will link various resources to those who need them, enabling new venture businesses to become viable with small capital. 
For example, the Town Community Project allows residents to raise and take care of their children together, giving them opportunities to discuss how to improve their lives, create jobs, and hold festivals.
Seoul’s sharing policy received the Gothenburg Award for Sustainable Development for making Seoul one of the world’s first sharing cities. Also, it was selected as 
Collaborative marketing and Social Innovation at Place 
Marketing Forum 2016 in France.
Sharing City, 
Seoul
Goal 3 Inclusive Growth: Prosperous Seoul for All

[Page 54]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
What Next?
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
Seoul’s Resilience Commitment
For implementing Resilient Seoul, Seoul designated the Deputy Mayor of Safety Management as the Chief Resilience Officer of Seoul and the position will be permanent. To assist the 
CRO, the Seoul Resilience Team will continue to monitor and develop new resilience agenda items and design initiatives for building resilience networks with cities around the globe.
 Role of the Seoul Resilience Team and its resilience plan
• Seoul’ Chief Resilience Officer: manage urban resilience of Seoul
• Seoul Resilience Team: evaluate the implementation of Resilient Seoul, foster international cooperation through the 100RC network, discover fresh ideas to boost Seoul’s resilience, develop an evaluation index to review Seoul’s resilience.
• Resilience Steering Committee: evaluate newly implemented projects and provide consultations 
Seoul’s resilience-building plan will be specified into short, mid, and long term, and investigate how we can turn challenges into opportunities. The cross-departmental collaboration will be the key aspect of driving our innovative plan into actions.
As part of our effort, Seoul will host the 1st Seoul International Urban Resilience Forum in 
September 2019 and hold the forum annually. Leaders of city governments around the world, and experts in urban issues will be welcome to join in the sessions to share best practices in the field and exchange insights and ideas. At the Forum, Resilient Seoul will be officially released.
The Forum will be a platform to bring together resilience leaders around the world to build partnerships and strengthen the global network of resilience. International Urban Resilience Forum Seoul 2019
• Date/ Venue: Monday, September 23rd – Tuesday, September 24th, 2019/ Lotte Hotel Seoul
• Host: Seoul Metropolitan Government, UNDRR
• Organized: Seoul Institute of Technology
• Sponsors: Ministry of the Interior and Safety, ICLEI, WeGO, CITYNET, Academia, Associations
• Participants: About 300 persons (Mayors, city experts, citizens)
• Purpose: To enhance the global network of cooperation to address urban problems of cities around the globe 
For what
Evaluation
Meeting
Progress 
Monitoring 
Meetings
When
End of
Year
Every quarter
Who
CRO
Team leader
Steering Committee
CRO
Working-level staff
What we do
• Evaluate implementation progress
• Release quarterly report on resilience
• Monitor and measure the city’s resilience performance
• Incorporate best-practices of cities around the world
• Institutionalize new practices

[Page 55]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019
Seoul Metropolitan Government: 
Mayor 
PARK Won-soon 
Public Communications Bureau 
Seoul Innovation Bureau 
Youth Policy Center 
Planning and Administration Office
Chief Resilience Officer 
KIM Hak-Jin, Deputy Mayor of Safety Management
Seoul Resilience Team 
KIM Kihyun, Director of Safety Management 
IM Dae-Un, Team Leader of Safety Policy Team 
HAN Byeong-Chan, Safety Policy Team 
SONG Yong-won, Safety Policy Team 
KWON Da-hye, Safety Policy Team 
PARK Jin, Seoul Institute 
CHO Hyun Sun, Safety Policy Team
Vice-Mayor I for Administrative Affairs 
Labor and Livelihood Security Policy Bureau 
Smart City Policy Bureau 
Women and Family Policy Affairs Office 
Economic Policy Office 
Welfare Policy Office 
City Transportation Office 
Culture Headquarters 
Climate and Environment Headquarters 
Lifelong Learning Bureau 
Citizens’ Health Bureau 
Henri Blas Associate Director, Global Delivery, 
City Resilience Delivery- APAC Singapore 
Gemma Kyle Program Manager- APAC Singapore
Strategy Partner 
Injae Hong, CEO of PeopleMatter
Resilience Steering Committee 
AHN Jong-joo, Director of Social Safety 
Communication Center at the Korean Social Policy Institute 
SONG Hoon, 
Vice Presidents of Soosung Engineering & Consulting 
PARK Ku-byeong, 
CEO of Education Facility Disaster Association 
OH Kyu-chang, Vice President of Isan Corporation 
SEO Gyu-seok, CEO of Sun Structural Engineering 
SEOL Jae-hoon, Senior Research Fellow at the 
Korea Transport Institute 
PARK Jae-sung, Professor at Soongsil University 
YOU Sung Gyou, Certified Public Labor Attorney, 
Labor Law Firm CHAMTER 
LYU Hyeon-Suk, Senior Research Fellow of the 
Korea Institute of Public Administration 
LEE Young Hee, Professor of Sociology at The 
Catholic University of Korea 
MOON Hyung-jin, CEO of Pradcomm 
KANG Tae-sun, Assistant Professor of Health and 
Safety Engineering at Semyung University 
JUNG Jin-woo, Professor of Safety Engineering at 
Seoul National University of Science and Technology 
JUNG Kyu-jin, 
Professor at Sungkyunkwan University
Public Agencies 
Ministry of the Interior and Safety 
Ministry of Employment and Labor 
Korean National Police Agency 
Seoul Metropolitan Office of Education 
Korea Financial Telecommunications & 
Clearings Institute 
Korea Labor Force Institute for The Aged 
24 Fire Departments 
Seoul Welfare Foundation 
Seoul Foundation of Women & Family, 
Healthy Family Support Center
Private Organizations 
KT Corporation 
Social enterprises 
Seoul Cooperative 
Lab2050 
Seoul Forum 
Korea Association of Community Senior Club 
K-Bank 
Payco 
Seoul Business Agency 
FOMANDESGIN
Acknowledgements
Vice-Mayor II for Administrative Affairs 
Safety Management Office 
Urban Regeneration Office 
Housing and Architecture Headquarters 
Green Seoul Bureau 
Water Circulation Safety Bureau 
Seoul Metropolitan Fire and Disaster Headquarters 
Seoul Emergency Operations Center 
Office of Waterworks
SMG-funded Institutes 
Seoul Institute of Technology 
Seoul Institute 
Seoul Volunteer Center 
Seoul Energy Corporation 
Seoul City Gas 
Seoul Design Foundation 
Seoul Housing & Communities Corporation 
Volunteer Centers in districts 
The 50+ Foundation 
Seoul Youth Guarantee Center 
Seoul Credit Guarantee Foundation
Seoul Districts 
25 Districts 
Village communities 
Autonomous resident councils
Partners
100 Resilient Cities 
Amit Prothi Associate Director, City Resilience 
Delivery- APAC Singapore

[Page 56]
| RESILIENT SEOUL | 
For Safe Seoul
For Resilient Seoul
Smart Safe City for All, Seoul
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019

[Page 57]
First published Sep 23rd, 2019
Publisher: Park Won-soon, Mayor of Seoul
Published by the Seoul Metropolitan G overnment 
Edited by Safety Management Office of the Seoul Metropolitan Government
Design by Foman Design
Government Publications Registration Number(GPRN) : 51-6110000-002114-01 
All material in this document is the property of the Seoul Metropolitan Government.
RESILIENT
SEOUL
A Strategy for Urban Resilience 2019