[Page 1]
P I T T S B U R G H ’ S R E S I L I E N C E S T R AT E G Y
To g e t h e r W e M o v e F o r wa r d A s O n e P i t t s b u r g h
2017
View the report, Inspirational Video, Events & More Online:
ONE PGH. P I TTS B U RGHPA .GOV

[Page 2]
VISION FOR A RESILIENT 
PITTSBURGH
Pittsburgh will be a resilient city when the entire community shares the same opportunities for prosperity, and when all residents are well cared for and prepared to face potential risks a bold vision for the city, building on the successes in recent decades and a wealth of community assets, while directly confronting the complex challenges that the city continues to face. 
Resilience is a holistic approach to urban systems management that demonstrates interrelationships between city plans and initiatives to achieve maximum community impact by addressing the root causes of systemic challenges. 
The strategy will help Pittsburgh realize the central purpose of a thriving city in the 21st century: to create conditions in which every resident can flourish in the face of challenges and every community can effectively respond and recover in any circumstance. 
By fostering a regional atmosphere of collaborative problem solving and resource coordination, the strategy will build on collective efforts and establish a guide for activities that need coordination, acceleration, amplification and initiation. 
Pittsburgh will thrive in the 21st century as a city of engaged, empowered and coordinated neighbors.

[Page 3]
Citizens of Pittsburgh,
Resilience is a journey. Cities recognize this statement better than most. Cities exist at the center of the ebb and flow of human progress, and as such have the ability to encourage innovation and great societal benefit. Along our journeys, cities confront the inevitable challenges that disrupt our thoughtful, predetermined courses and have the ability to respond to opportunities that seemingly arise out of nowhere. It is important to recognize that both opportunities and disruptions offer the greatest occasion for administrators and elected officials to capitalize, create benefit and chart new and positive trajecto­ ries for their communities.
For Pittsburgh, the current chapter of our resilience journey begins with the acknowledgment of our recent past. A reverence to our scars, it is within our history that we find lessons from which we can learn, and set a course that allows us to improve and drive towards a stronger, albeit uncertain future.
The City of Pittsburgh and our residents are familiar with the resilience journey. Pittsburgh’s history is filled with the peaks of success and the valleys of disappointment. The picture of Pittsburgh is a checkered range marked with impairments such as air and water pollution, labor and racial unrest and economic boom and bust; alongside numerous industrial innovations, advances in science and education and a rich cultural tradition. It is with this recognition of our past that we look forward towards our future. It is this understanding of history that is at the root of our partnership with 100 Resilient Cities, and why 
Today, Pittsburgh finds itself in a pivotal moment in history. The challenges of globalization, our ever changing environment, and urbanization - once the causes of many of the City’s shocks and stresses, are now initiating a shift for the City; from managing population and economic decline to encouraging us to manage growth and prosperity. Amid a time of positive momentum, we recognize that now is the perfect moment in time to chart the course for Pittsburgh’s next generation. All 
Pittsburghers have not benefited from the current momentum, and with this in mind, let me state that a resilient community must be one that provides inclusive, sustainable and welcoming opportunities for all its residents.
Building resilience is a process. Its requires recognition of our challenges, and the ability to heal physical and mental wounds, to create adaptive policies, and to restructure investment decisions. To lead this process, our strategy is built with the belief that with the right tools, the ability to empower our people, and the acknowledgment that the City of Pittsburgh will continu­ ously improve - we will all come together as neighbors to find solutions to our common problems.
We recognize that one of the shortcomings in our past was that we walked separately, along differing paths. Today, we have the opportunity to walk with intent and purpose as a community towards a brighter future. We, the City government, are at the helm of this plan - but we are not at the center. AT the core of this strategy are the residents, the people of the City of 
Pittsburgh.
Today, together, we move forward as one Pittsburgh.
Sincerely,
William Peduto
Mayor, City of Pittsburgh

[Page 4]
Dear Pittsburgh,
On behalf of the entire 100 Resilient Cities team, I want to congratulate the City of Pittsburgh on the release of ONE PGH: of urban resilience for the city’s residents, neighborhoods, and the region. As the city’s post-industrial resurgence continues, it’s not for all, it’s not for us.” 
The Steel City’s success is proof that post-industrial demise is not a permanent condition. After capturing the world’s imagination in the late 19th and first half of the 20th century – in 1911, the city was producing half of all American steel -- the city devolved into a cautionary tale, with steel mills and related industries shuttering, and the effects of heavy industry taking their toll on the environment. Along with its industrial base, the immense amount of resources that the Fricks, Carnegies, and Mellons invested to create world class educational and cultural institutions also faded. But after losing 40% of its population between 1970 and 
2006, Pittsburgh is growing again, this time at the forefront of a rustbelt revival that is anchored in a broad variety of new industries spanning technology, finance, higher education, and advanced manufacturing. But, as this strategy acknowledges, not all in Pittsburgh have felt this rebirth equally. 
The actions outlined within ONE PGH will strengthen Pittsburgh not just in the face of the sudden shocks that will confront cities throughout the 21st Century, but also the chronic stresses that challenge the city over the longer term, and that exacerbate the effects of those shocks when they do occur. That is the power of resilience solutions: single interventions designed to achieve multiple benefits. 
The support of City leadership has been critical toward the formation of this Strategy. Mayor Bill Peduto has helped promote resilience as a cornerstone for collaborative action across the city and region, in both the public and private sectors, and has championed the message of an open, resurgent, and globally connected Pittsburgh throughout our network. We thank the team has led a robust, community-driven process that reached far and wide, reflecting the full spectrum of Pittsburgh’s voices and concerns.
As our partnership moves into implementation, it does so with a major advantage – the city’s groundbreaking planning initiative, p4 Pittsburgh. Launched in 2015, p4 provides a framework for unified action across the city to achieve a just and sustainable future. Its ethos of collaboration and communal reach will deepen the impact of the Strategy, and contribute to the shared goal of a “world class city that benefits all.” 
Pittsburgh has already shown its ability to recover and adapt to the new challenges of the 21st Century and we are excited for the continued course of resilience this Strategy charts.
Congratulations again on this enormous achievement, and we look forward to our continued partnership in the journey ahead.
Michael Berkowitz
President, 100 Resilient Cities

[Page 5]
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

[Page 6]
identified in Phase 1, additional stakeholder engagement; brainstorming of the goals, objectives, and actions that comprise the resilience framework; and prioritization and 
3, implementation, will follow release of the strategy. This of the city’s Chief Resilience Officer (CRO) Grant Ervin and the City Resilience team in the Division of Sustainability and 
Resilience, the RAND Corporation as a strategy partner, and 
100RC as the funder and collaborator. It has also involved the contributions of over 600 Pittsburghers since June 2015.
The strategy is intended to acknowledge and address the city’s recent challenges and trends pro-actively, applying lessons from the past and from other partnering cities to forge a stronger future for the city and region. Because the city of Pittsburgh is the beneficiary of funding from 
100RC, the strategy will often refer to “Pittsburgh” or “the city” in a leadership capacity. However, the vision of a recommendations in this strategy aim to help the entire 
Pittsburgh metropolitan region move toward a model of greater collaboration in order to support planning and convey benefits to the region more broadly.
PITTSBURGH’S RESILIENCE CHALLENGES
The threats to Pittsburgh’s resilience form a constellation of risks, including both chronic stresses—long-term, slow burning issues that overwhelm the capacity of city resources and erode resident wellbeing—and potential acute shocks— sudden, large-scale disasters that disrupt city services and threaten residents from extreme weather. 
While the city’s inland geography protects its residents from many of the natural hazards that are expected to occur more frequently in coastal regions, the city’s endemic stresses disproportionately affect some of its most vulnerable residents and represent its core resilience challenges. 
Specifically, Pittsburgh faces significant challenges with social, racial, and economic inequities that have persisted for decades, which have led to unequal access to housing, transportation, employment, and services. Other key stresses affecting vulnerable Pittsburghers include aging infrastructure and poor air and water quality. Concerns about affordability and gentrification have also emerged as the city redevelops, and an aging population and workforce continue to threaten the economic stability of the region. 
Simultaneously, fragmentation of effort among non-profits and local governments in the region hinders efforts to address these challenges. Moreover, acute shocks, some predicted to become more likely as a result of climate change, pose threats to the city. Potential future shocks include extreme weather, flooding, landslides, and extreme temperatures, among other concerns identified during strategy development.
CITY CONTEXT
The City of Pittsburgh celebrated its 200th anniversary in 2016 as a city on the rise. The grit and ingenuity of generations of Pittsburghers has helped the city rebound after fires, floods, and the collapse of the steel industry in the mid-20th century. After losing 40 percent of its population between 1970 and 2006, Pittsburgh is growing again. The number of millennials and recent college graduates in the city, for example, went up by more than eight percent over the past decade. Today, Pittsburgh faces lower natural disaster risk and is less exposed to another economic shock than many other cities due to its location, natural resources, and diversified economy. Investments in higher education, workforce retraining, startups and small businesses, and the redevelopment and remediation of a thousand acres of former industrial sites have drawn attention to Pittsburgh as one of America’s most livable cities. 
Despite its well-publicized recent successes, the “Steel City” must still overcome the stresses associated with its industrial legacy and crumbling infrastructure, while responding to ongoing pressures stemming from urbanization, globalization, and climate change. Persistent socioeconomic inequities, coupled with a history of fragmented governance, planning and service delivery, continue to undercut resident quality of life and strain city resources. 
Public, private, and non-profit organizations have made significant investments in building a more livable Pittsburgh, cleaning up the city’s industrial legacy, and creating new economic and residential opportunities. A number of strategic initiatives have been initiated in recent years to address resilience-related goals, including p4, the 
Roadmap for Inclusive Innovation, Welcoming Pittsburgh, a Climate Action Plan, My Brother’s Keeper, a Threat and 
Hazard Identification and Risk Assessment, and the Western 
Pennsylvania Regional Data Center (WPRDC). These collective efforts are helping to transform the city’s narrative from a story of loss and decline to one of resilience and opportunity, but have not yet been aligned or coordinated to ensure successful implementation or improved and sustainable outcomes for residents’ wellbeing. This strategy will strengthen collaborations and support the integration of the practice of urban resilience among the people and the institutions of the city. It will afford long-term benefits by ensuring: 
• 
Improved coordination among government and non-government organizations
• 
Better budgeting and capital coordination city-wide
• 
Adoption of resilience practices in government, institutions, organizations, neighborhoods, etc.
• 
Increased resident engagement and empowerment
The present time represents an important crossroads for the city. Pittsburgh seeks to capitalize on its recovery with sustainable growth, but needs to avoid repeating the mistakes of the past. The way forward demands thoughtful planning, close coordination, and integration between and among government and nongovernmental partners to ensure that the city grows equitably and sustainably. The city also must recognize the needs and value of its long-term residents while welcoming and supporting newcomers. 
Capitalizing on Pittsburgh’s assets—its universities; wealth of parks, rivers, and streams; robust philanthropic sector; highly collaborative spirit; new economic drivers; visionary and capable non-profits; and resident enthusiasm and comprehensive strategy to address these opportunities and challenges. Pittsburgh applied and was selected to become one of 100 Resilient Cities– Pioneered by the Rockefeller 
Foundation (100RC) in December 2014. 100RC helps cities around the world become more resilient to the physical, social, and economic challenges that are a growing part of the 21st century. 100RC defines resilience as the capacity of individuals, communities, institutions, businesses, and systems within a city to survive, adapt, and grow no matter what kinds of chronic stresses and acute shocks they experience. 
HOW THE STRATEGY WAS DEVELOPED phases. Phase 1 involved stakeholder engagement and data collection activities to understand the current state of the city’s resilience, resulting in a Preliminary Resilience 
Assessment. Phase 2 entailed in-depth research on themes 
100RC defines city resilience as the capacity of individuals, communities, institutions, businesses, and systems within a city to survive, adapt, and grow no matter what kinds of chronic stresses and acute shocks they experience.

[Page 7]
Each of these four goals is supported by a series of sector-specific objective. While each objective typically focuses on a specific topic area within each goal, the objectives are also designed to work across stresses and shocks to produce a “resilience dividend” – that is, multiple benefits for resilience from a single activity. 
This strategy identifies both existing and new actions related to resilience, connects these actions to relevant resilience goals and objectives, and identifies next steps to ensure that these actions can be implemented successfully to yield improved outcomes for residents. Detail on 
Pittsburgh’s resilience actions can be found in Appendix A. 
PITTSBURGH’S RESILIENCE FRAMEWORK major resilience challenges and help the city build the capacity to successfully confront future threats. The goals of Pittsburgh resilience framework purposefully align with the four “p”s of the p4 framework, already adopted by partners across the city to inspire innovative, sustainable, and inclusive action. The resilience framework then builds upon p4 to create a holistic, community-centered approach and to describe the specific ways in which different sectors will work collectively to make 
Pittsburgh a resilient city in terms of its People, Place, Planet, and Performance.
PEOPLE
Pittsburgh will empower all residents to contribute to thriving and supportive communities by ensuring that basic needs are met. We will be an inclusive city of innovation that celebrates our diversity, and all residents will have equal access to resources and opportunity
PLANET
Pittsburgh will achieve long-term environmental health through wise stewardship, improved use of our resources, and a reduced carbon footprint
PERFORMANCE
Pittsburgh will work closely with neighbors and partners for improved planning and decision-making
PLACE
Pittsburgh will use land to benefit all residents; to increase social cohesion, connectivity, public and ecological health; and to protect against current and future risks. We will design, scale, and maintain our infrastructure for current and future needs, providing benefits and services to our neighborhoods during times of calm and crisis
• Transportation
• Recapitalized infrastructure
• Mixed uses
• Vacant land
• Green space
• Public space
• Communications
• Commercial transport
• Disaster Reliability
• Water
• Local and renewable energy
• Resource efficiency
• Natural infrastructure
• Resilient design
• Entrepreneurship
• Civic engagement
• Collaboration
• Measurement
• Housing
• Health
• Food
• Safety
• Education
• Emergency preparedness
• Resilient households
• Workforce development
• Diversity

[Page 8]
STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION integration, and long-term sustainability. The Division of Sustainability and Resilience, as a part of the 
Department of City Planning in collaboration with the Mayor’s Office, will serve as the lead office for strategy implementation and will support a series of implementation steps through the next year to facilitate the effective rollout and adoption of the strategy across sectors and stakeholders. The immediate next steps for strategy implementation in year one include: 
1. Convene action leadership groups
2. Establish a governance and institutionalization framework
3. Establish a measurement framework
4. Integrate resilience-building into civic engagement and public events. 
The new and existing actions featured in this strategy are the activities to be implemented in order for 
Pittsburgh to achieve its resilience goals and objectives. Addressing the goals of Pittsburgh’s resilience strategy requires not only the initiation of some new actions, but also better coordination, amplification, and acceleration of promising existing government and nongovernmental activities and initiatives to create a resilient and livable city of innovation for all. Figure 2 shows an example of how existing and new activities fall along a taxonomy of implementation.
Figure 2. Taxonomy for implementing resilience actions with select examples Additional efforts are needed to support implementation over the long term. These include coordination among government and nongovernmental sectors, resource allocation and a cohesive investment framework, community awareness and ongoing education, and targeted partner building. Ongoing measurement and regular analysis and use of the data collected will also be central to implementation.
Initiate
Coordinate
Amplify
Accelerate
Develop and implement new initiatives. 
Next steps entail identifying lead organizations and assembling working groups to begin action plans.
Align ongoing actions with multiple owners and actors to a common set of goals. Next steps; involve determining governance processes and roles and responsibilities for diverse partners.
Expand scope, reach, and/or impact of pilot or recently initiated actions. Next steps entail identifying the ways in which actions ought to be expanded, additional resources required, and plans or proposals for new funding resources.
Support the implementation and/or uptake of existing actions with established leadership and concrete next steps. Next steps involve creating action plans to fasttrack specific elements of each action group.

[Page 10]
INTRODUCTION
The City of Pittsburgh celebrated its 200th anniversary in 
2016. The grit and ingenuity of generations of Pittsburghers has helped the city rebound after fires, floods, and the collapse of the steel industry in the mid-20th century. After losing 40 percent of its population between 1970 and 2006, Pittsburgh is growing again. Today, Pittsburgh faces lower natural disaster risk and is less exposed to another economic shock than many other cities due to its location, natural resources, and diversified economy. Investments in higher education, workforce retraining, startups and small businesses, and the redevelopment and remediation of a thousand acres of former industrial sites have drawn attention to Pittsburgh as one of America’s most livable cities. The city is home to 
378 Leadership in Energy & Environmental Design (LEED) certified projects and two “living buildings.”4 Pittsburgh was named the number one food city in America by Zagat in 2015, and 2,800 new hotel rooms have been added in the city since 2011.5
However, the “Steel City” must still overcome the stresses associated with its industrial legacy and crumbling infrastructure while responding to ongoing pressures stemming from the global mega-trends of urbanization, globalization, and climate change. Persistent socioeconomic inequities, coupled with a history of fragmented governance, planning and service delivery, continue to undercut resident quality of life and strain city resources. 
To build upon the city’s strengths and to improve its resilience, Pittsburgh applied and was selected to become one of 100 Resilient Cities– Pioneered by the Rockefeller 
Foundation (100RC) in December 2014. 100RC helps cities around the world become more resilient to the physical, social, and economic challenges that are a growing part of the 21st century. 100RC defines resilience as the capacity of individuals, communities, institutions, businesses, and systems within a city to survive, adapt, and grow no matter what kinds of chronic stresses and acute shocks they experience. 
Becoming part of 100RC has provided Pittsburgh with funding for a Chief Resilience Officer (CRO) to lead resilience efforts and a team to support him (Resilient membership in a global partnership network of peer cities to share lessons learned; and access to a city solutions network, which provides member cities with access to a curated suite of resilience-building tools and services. The 100RC network also allows the city to share Pittsburgh’s story and learn from the community of cities around the world. The Resilient 
Pittsburgh team sees this as an important opportunity to harness community energy and realize the potential of 
Pittsburgh’s residents and institutions to create positive and lasting long-term change. 
PURPOSE OF THE STRATEGY
Pittsburgh has already demonstrated marked resilience in recent decades after recovering from the steel industry’s collapse. But this story remains unfinished: the city’s livability and affordability are not broadly shared among residents, and ongoing stresses and acute shocks continue to strain city resources. In 2016, for example, the city suffered a series of new shocks. In August, flash flooding put Washington 
Boulevard, a main thoroughfare in the city’s East End where flooding became fatal in 2014, underwater again. Routine maintenance caused a fire which closed the Liberty Bridge, a critical transportation link between the City of Pittsburgh and the South Hills suburbs, for multiple weeks in September. 
Consumer alerts from PWSA in the summer of 2016 exposed elevated lead levels in Pittsburgh’s drinking water. These events put a spotlight on the continued challenges the city faces. the city for these kinds of inevitable challenges. It is intended to help Pittsburghers work together to address the deeply rooted structural, social, economic, and environmental stresses that threaten the progress of the city and its residents. This strategy will strengthen collaborations and support the integration of the practice of urban resilience among the people and the institutions of the city. It will afford long-term benefits by ensuring: 
• 
Improved coordination among government and non-government organizations
• 
Better budgeting and capital coordination city-wide
• 
Adoption of resilience practices in government, institutions, organizations, neighborhoods, etc.
• 
Increased resident engagement and empowerment
City resilience is the capacity of individuals, communities, institutions, businesses, and systems within a city to survive, adapt, and grow no matter what kinds of chronic stresses and acute shocks they experience.

[Page 11]
to understand resilience in Pittsburgh, relates existing and new programs and investments to this framework, and provides a pathway to evaluating the long-term resilience value of government and nongovernmental actions. It is also intended to serve as an “investment prospectus” for the city by showing where gaps exist and where new investment could yield the greatest benefits and co-benefits for all city residents. Building on the Mayor’s vision, the Resilient 
Pittsburgh team asserts that Pittsburgh will be a resilient city when the entire community shares in the same opportunities for prosperity and all residents are equally well cared for and prepared to face potential risks.
PITTSBURGH’S CITY CONTEXT
Pittsburgh is a mid-sized American city with a current population of just over 300,0006 and is the principal city of Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, which is home to over 
1.2 million residents.7 The broader ten-county metropolitan region includes 2.57 million residents, making it the 22nd largest metropolitan area in the United States.7,8 
DEEP CONNECTION TO NEIGHBORHOOD & PLACE
Pittsburgh’s 90 unique neighborhoods are places that people care about. Pittsburghers have a strong sense of identity within the neighborhoods where they live now or where they grew up. This connection is not limited to a physical place, but includes a shared emotional connection with the people and experiences created in that neighborhood. 
Within these neighborhoods, a community ethos is born, a sense of pride and a willingness to collaborate that is shared from generation to generation.
Pittsburgh’s geography is defined by hills, waterways, and bridges (Figure 4). The city is famously located at the confluence of the Allegheny and Monongahela Rivers (and their tributaries), which converge just outside of downtown to form the Ohio River. Over 2,000 miles of streams and 
90 miles of rivers flow through Allegheny County (Figure 
5).15 Transportation routes generally follow the paths of rivers and streams, but the city is also home to some of the steepest streets and roads in the country, which connect different communities. These features contribute to a unique and beautiful cityscape but also divide the city into isolated geographic “pockets.”
Western Pennsylvania includes a wealth of natural infrastructure, including forests, waterways, and other habitats sustained by Pittsburgh’s relatively wet climate. 
The city and Allegheny County manage over 15,000 acres of parks or urban forest, providing a green landscape and recreational opportunities for residents and visitors. Active conservation by city and county park organizations has expanded and improved these amenities in recent years. The city and local nonprofits support urban agriculture and local food systems, including a number of community gardens and strategic uses of vacant land.
Figure 4. Topographic map of Pittsburgh
Figure notes: This topographic map of Pittsburgh shows areas of high elevation in red, notably the Hill District, Brookline, Carrick, Lincoln Place, Observatory Hill, and Summer Hill, and low elevation in green, notably most of Pittsburgh’s Northside, Southside, Downtown, the Strip District, and Lawrenceville. Source: United States Geological Survey, 2000.16
Figure 5. Map of Allegheny County municipalities and hydrology
Figure notes: This map shows the network of rivers and streams that flows throughout 
Allegheny County. Note the lack of streams within the City of Pittsburgh, a result of piping most of the natural streamflow that once occurred within the city limits. Source: City of 
Pittsburgh, 2016.17
Pittsburgh is a mid-sized 
American city with a current population of just over 
305,0006 and is the principal city of 
Allegheny 
County, 
Pennsylvania, which is home to over 1.2 million residents.7 
The broader ten-county metropolitan region includes 
2.57 million residents, making it the 22nd largest metropolitan area in the 
United States.7,8

[Page 12]
The city’s and the region’s populations have both skewed older in recent decades. The proportion of elderly residents (age 65 and older) in Allegheny County was 16.7 percent in 2010, compared with 13 percent for the nation as a whole.12 This proportion is projected to grow to 21 percent by 2040, mirroring national demographic trends.12 However, 
Pittsburgh is also experiencing a resurgence of young people moving to the city or remaining after graduating from one of its colleges and universities: In the past decade, there has been a 29-percent increase in young graduates choosing to remain in the city.13
Pittsburgh’s narrative has been characterized by dramatic shifts in population size, industry viability, and economic development. Known as the “Gateway to the West” in its early days as a frontier village, 
Pittsburgh’s location at the convergence of the 
Allegheny, 
Monongahela and 
Ohio Rivers provided ideal access for shipping materials and the region’s abundant natural resources by river and rail. The city’s population and industrial power rose in the late 19th and early 20th century during the Industrial Era.
The steel and industrial boom produced investments in the city’s physical infrastructure and educational and cultural institutions, led by industrialists and financiers such as 
Andrew Carnegie, Andrew Mellon, and Henry Clay Frick who built their fortunes in Pittsburgh. While heavy industry, coal mining, and steel production provided jobs, prominence, and money to the region, they also took a toll on city residents and the natural environment, leading to severe air and water pollution, acid mine drainage, and polluted soils. By the 1940s, Pittsburgh was critical in producing steel, ammunition and battleships for the war effort. 
Pittsburgh’s post WWII peak was followed by major economic changes, including the collapse of the domestic steel industry in the 1970s and 80s, the recession of 1982-83, and suburban flight, which all led to the out-migration of much of the population. By 2000, the city’s population had halved along with its tax base, while the amount of infrastructure requiring maintenance remained the same. 
As the population shrank, the City struggled to maintain quality of life for its residents. In the 1990s, the City and 
County formed the Regional Asset District, a 1% county-wide sales tax to fund cultural institutions, recreational facilities and libraries. City government-owned assets such as the 
National Aviary, Phipps Conservatory and the Pittsburgh 
Zoo and Aquarium then became nonprofit organizations that received RAD funding 18. During this time, Pittsburgh 
Water and Sewer Authority was formed for bonding capacity. 
In 2003, the City laid off 446 full and part time employees, and in 2004 petitioned the Commonwealth to be designated as distressed according to the criteria of Act 47, and subject to 
Commonwealth oversight. 
Pittsburgh’s credit rating was given junk bond status.19
The decentralization of assets and lack of capacity for service delivery at the city government led to the rise of philanthropy and the nonprofit sector to fill the voids and maintain quality of life for Pittsburghers. Today, as the City government rebounds, fragmentation between organizations and government challenges the efficiency of providing services to city residents, while years of deferred maintenance of the city’s oversized infrastructure is emerging from a major stress into a cascade of shocks. 
THE CITY IS RANKED HIGHLY IN OVERALL LIVABILITY 
DUE TO ITS LOW COST OF LIVING AND WIDE RANGE 
OF 
ECONOMIC, 
CULTURAL, 
AND 
RECREATIONAL 
OPPORTUNITIES. HOWEVER, RESIDENTIAL SEGREGATION 
AND INCOME DISPARITIES MEAN THESE OPPORTUNITIES 
ARE 
NOT 
UNIVERSALLY 
SHARED. 
PITTSBURGH’S 
POPULATION IS APPROXIMATELY 66 PERCENT WHITE 
AND 26 PERCENT BLACK, WITH ASIAN AMERICANS, 
HISPANIC AMERICANS, AND OTHER ETHNICITIES MAKING 
UP LESS THAN 10 PERCENT OF THE POPULATION.7 AS 
OF 2010, PITTSBURGH WAS CONSIDERED THE 17TH 
MOST RESIDENTIALLY SEGREGATED CITY OF THE 50 
U.S. METROPOLITAN REGIONS WITH THE LARGEST 
POPULATIONS OF BLACK RESIDENTS (FIGURE 3).9 
MANY PITTSBURGH RESIDENTS, INCLUDING ABOUT 30 
PERCENT OF THE CITY’S BLACK POPULATION, LIVE IN 
COMMUNITIES THAT HAVE NOT FULLY EXPERIENCED THE 
CITY’S ECONOMIC RECOVERY AND FACE ECONOMIC AND 
RACIAL INEQUITY.10 FOR EXAMPLE, BETWEEN 2007 AND 
2011 THE MEDIAN HOUSEHOLD INCOME FOR WHITE, 
NON-HISPANIC PITTSBURGH RESIDENTS WAS $37,161. 
MEDIAN INCOME FOR BLACK RESIDENTS, BY CONTRAST, 
WAS ONLY $21,790, BELOW THE POVERTY LINE FOR A 
FAMILY OF FOUR.11
700,000
600,000
500,000
400,000
300,000
200,000
100,000
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
2015
Pittsburgh Population, 1950-2015
Figure notes: Historical population of Pittsburgh, 1950-2015, Source: U.S. Census Bureau

[Page 13]
At the same time, however, rising housing prices in 
Pittsburgh’s traditionally mixed-income neighborhoods, concerns that the new tech-based economic growth may not provide broad-based opportunities, and a recognition that Pittsburgh’s close neighbors (its inner-ring suburbs) have largely not rebounded from the collapse of the steel industry have raised questions about who is benefiting from Pittsburgh’s transformation. Recent analyses ranked 
Pittsburgh in the bottom quarter of the top 100 regions nationwide in terms of progress on racial economic inclusion, as defined by racial gaps in wages, poverty, and employment.21
Upgrades and maintenance of the city’s infrastructure and some of its institutions have also not been keeping pace with the rapidly changing environment.22 Moreover, local venture capital investment will not fully meet the needs of growthstage companies started in the city, and many of the city’s most successful knowledge-based companies have sought support from outside of the city to grow their businesses.23 
The present time represents an important crossroads for the city. Pittsburgh seeks to capitalize on its recovery with sustainable growth, but needs to avoid repeating the mistakes of the past. The way forward demands thoughtful planning, close coordination, and integration between and among government and nongovernmental partners to ensure that the city grows equitably and sustainably. The city also must recognize the needs and value of its long-term residents while welcoming and supporting newcomers. A number of strategic initiatives have been initiated in recent years to address resilience-related goals (Figure 8). These include, for example, changes to city operations, p4, the 
Roadmap for Inclusive Innovation, Welcoming Pittsburgh, a Climate Action Plan, My Brother’s Keeper, the City’s 
Comprehensive Plan, a Threat and Hazard Identification and 
Risk Assessment, and the Western Pennsylvania Regional 
Data Center (WPRDC). These collective efforts are helping to transform the city’s narrative from a story of loss and decline to one of resilience and opportunity but have not yet been aligned or coordinated to ensure successful implementation or improved and sustainable outcomes for residents’ wellbeing. 
FIGURE 8: Resilience related efforts in Pittsburgh over the past five years
TODAY, THERE IS RENEWED INTEREST IN PITTSBURGH AS 
A PLACE TO LIVE AND WORK DUE TO THE LOW COST OF 
LIVING20, AVAILABILITY OF CULTURAL AMENITIES, AND 
OPPORTUNITIES FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND 
DIVERSIFICATION. PITTSBURGH IS HOME TO 13 DEGREEGRANTING INSTITUTIONS, THREE MODERN SPORTS ARENAS, 
AND TWO OF THE COUNTRY’S LARGEST BANKS. THE CITY’S 
ECONOMY HAS A NUMBER OF POSITIVE DRIVERS, AND ITS 
CURRENT KEY INDUSTRIES INCLUDE HIGHER EDUCATION, 
TECHNOLOGY 
AND 
ADVANCED 
MANUFACTURING, 
HEALTHCARE, 
FINANCIAL 
SERVICES, 
AND 
ENERGY 
PRODUCTION. A STRONG LOCAL FOOD SCENE, BURGEONING 
STARTUP CULTURE, AND GROWING “MAKER MOVEMENT” 
ARE STARTING TO ATTRACT ENTREPRENEURS TO THE AREA. 
UBER IS DEVELOPING AND TESTING AUTONOMOUS VEHICLES 
IN THE CITY, PUTTING THE CITY AT THE FOREFRONT OF 
TRANSPORTATION INNOVATION. WHILE PITTSBURGH IS STILL 
A CONSIDERED A “DISTRESSED MUNICIPALITY” IN TERMS 
OF CITY FINANCES, SINCE 2012 THE CITY HAS BEEN ABLE TO 
BORROW AGAIN TO INVEST IN CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS. 
AVERAGE UNEMPLOYMENT HOVERS AROUND 8 PERCENT 
TODAY, DOWN FROM 18 PERCENT IN 1983.
April 2012
PGH 2030 Districts
August 2013
Open Space Parks & 
Recreation plan
September 2014
Lower Hill redevelopment
May 2015
Plan for a Healthier 
Allegheny
November 2015
My Brother’s Keeper
April 2015
P4
June 2015
Uptown EcoInnovation 
District
October 2015
Western PA Regional 
Data Center
September 2015
Welcoming Pittsburgh
June 2016
Smart PGH consortium
December 2016
City Wide Green
First Plan
2016
Policy Link: 
All in Pittsburgh: The path to equitable development
January 2017
ONEPGH:
Pittsburgh’s resilience strategy
September 2015
Roadmap for Inclusive 
Innovation
2012
Cultural Heritage & 
Historic Preservation plan
May 2016
COWS: a Pittsburgh that 
Works for Working People
2016
Pittsburgh Threat Hazard 
Identification and Risk 
Assessment

[Page 14]
PITTSBURGH’S RESILIENCE CHALLENGES:
STRESSES & SHOCKS
The threats to Pittsburgh’s resilience form a constellation of risks, including chronic stresses related to water management, air quality, equal opportunity, and aging infrastructure and potential acute shocks from extreme weather due to climate change, another economic collapse, or infrastructure failure (Figure 12). More detail on Pittsburgh’s resilience challenges can be found in the PRA, available for download from the city’s website. 
Figure 12. Pittsburgh’s key stresses and shocks
Figure notes: This diagram shows the priority shocks and stresses identified for Pittsburgh during strategy development. The size of the bubbles correspond to the relative importance placed on the shock or stress by stakeholders in a workshop exercise. Sizes Approximate to percentage.
Figure 13. Relationship between stresses, shocks, and their impacts 
Figure notes: This figure illustrates the potential impact of ongoing chronic stresses coupled with a potential future shock, showing the interrelationships between shocks and stresses.
 
STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT and Resilience, RAND Corporation as the strategy partner, and 100RC. The team developed this strategy by researching the challenges facing Pittsburgh, gathering input from a wide range of stakeholders, convening residents for Deliberative 
Community Forums using the Deliberative Democracy process (see pg. 97 for more information), and connecting with other members of the 100RC network. From June 2015 through January 2017, more than 600 Pittsburghers were engaged to support the strategy development.
PHASE I
June 2015
Initial workshop with focus groups concentrating on: Academic, Civic, 
Business, Philanthropy, Neighbor­ hoods & Regional
October 2015
City/Stakeholders Workshop
November 2015
Deliberative Community Forums with 
150 participants
January 2016
Steering Committee
PHASE II
May 2016
Discovery Area Workshops:
July-August 2016
Systems Performance Workshops
July - October 2016
In-depth research activities
November 2016
Steering Committee Review
The Preliminary Resilience 
Assessment (PRA) 
Phase 1 strategy de­ velopment process, including more detail on Pittsburgh’s shocks, stresses, and assets.
Pittsburgh’s vision for the future; A resilient 
Pittsburgh
Chronic stresses are long-term, slow burning issues that overwhelm the capacity of city resources and erode resident wellbeing.
Acute shocks are sudden, large-scale disasters that disrupt city services and threaten residents
STRESS
SHOCK
IMPACT
Aging Population
Poor Air Quality
Hazardous Material Transport
Fragile Hillsides
Disease Outbreak
Heat Wave
Infrastructure Failure
Heavy Rainstorms
Increased likelihood of death
Increased asthma attacks
Hazardous Materials incident
Landslides +

[Page 15]
Figure 15. Inequity in Pittsburgh: a snapshot
Employment and poverty: 
• 
Unemployment rates show racial patterns, with black men having an unemployment rate of 12.2% compared to 5.1% for white men.26 
• 55% of black girls in Pittsburgh live in poverty.28
Education: 
• 
In 2014, only 37% of black PPS 3rd to 8th graders were reading-proficient compared to 45% of black students of the same age statewide, 71% of white 
PPS students, and 77% of white students statewide.29 
• 
Black girls are 3X more likely to be suspended from school than white girls.28
Health: 
• 
Black Pittsburghers face higher rates of exposure to air toxins, smoking rates, hospitalization due to asthma, and infant mortality rates than do white 
Pittsburghers.30 
• 
Predominantly black neighborhoods lacking access to full-service grocery stores, farmers’ markets, or other sources of healthy food options include 
Homewood, Lincoln-Lemington-Belmar, and Beechview.31 
Affordable housing 
• 
Between 2000 and 2014, housing prices in Allegheny County increased 59%. 32
• 
Between 2000 and 2014 housing prices in Lawrenceville increased 369%.32
Safety and justice: 
• 
Homicide data from 2010 to 201533 showed 94 homicides in five majority-black areas of the city compared to 0 homicides in the majority-white neighborhoods just across the street (Penn Avenue, running through Pittsburgh’s East End). 
• 
Black Pittsburghers were more than 3x as likely as residents of other races to report being a victim of a crime.34 
• 
In 2014, blacks constituted 56% of all arrests in Pittsburgh, although they make up only 26.1% of the population.7,35 
Transportation:
• 
About1/4 of Pittsburgh residents do not own a car.36 
• 
The average Pittsburgher spends 42% of his or her annual income on housing and transportation,36 which is at the upper limit of what the U.S. Department of Transportation has deemed to be “affordable” for housing and transportation.37 
ENDEMIC STRESSES THAT IMPACT PITTSBURGHERS
Segregated and inequitable schools, neighborhoods, and labor markets
High rates of violence, poor health, poverty, blight, and an education system facing significant achievement gaps continue to affect many of Pittsburgh’s communities, particularly populations of color and residents of low-income neighborhoods. As of 2010, Pittsburgh was considered the 17th most residentially segregated city of the 50 U.S. metropolitan regions with the largest populations of black residents,9 a remnant of redlining policies from the mid-20th century, which limited the ability of Pittsburghers of color to get mortgages in certain neighborhoods (Figure 14). While 
Pittsburgh today is gaining recognition for its quality of life and livability, not all of the city’s neighborhoods are sharing in the same prosperity. Some communities are negatively impacted by the city’s development, as housing prices rise and employment growth among historically disadvantaged populations remains relatively stagnant. Historical and structural racial discrimination is evident in Pittsburgh’s neighborhood segregation and economic inequities continue to play a role in influencing the quality of life of many of Pittsburgh’s residents of color (Figure 15).
Figure 14. Historical “redlining” in Pittsburgh’s neighborhoods
Figure notes: This historical map shows the areas where “redlining” occurred in Pittsburgh in the early 20th century. The demographic makeup of the city in 2017 is largely still reflective of policies that limited the areas in which populations of color were able to purchase homes. 
Source: Winling, Urban Oasis Digital HOLC Maps.26
WHILE MANY OF PITTSBURGH’S 
LOW TO MODERATE INCOME 
NEIGHBORHOODS EXPERIENCE 
ESPECIALLY 
HIGH 
RATES 
OF 
HOUSING 
VACANCY 
AND 
BLIGHT, 
OTHERS 
ARE 
UNDERGOING 
DEVELOPMENT 
AND 
SEEING 
INCREASED 
DEMAND. RISING RENTS AND 
MARKET VALUES ARE RESULTING 
IN 
CHANGING 
ECONOMIC 
MAKEUP OF NEIGHBORHOODS, 
WHICH 
AFFECTS 
LONG-TIME 
RESIDENTS. 
AS 
THE 
CITY 
ATTRACTS 
NEW 
RESIDENTS 
EARNING HIGHER WAGES AS 
A RESULT OF THE GROWTH OF 
THE TECH SECTOR, CONCERNS 
ESCALATE OF DISPLACEMENT 
AND A GROWING ECONOMIC 
DIVIDE.
Source: COWS: A Pittsburgh that works for working people

[Page 16]
Figure 17. Pittsburgh’s aging infrastructure
Roads, bridges, locks, and dams: 
• 5,147.4 square miles of roadway in the city39
• 1966 = average date of last construction or repair of bridge in the city40
• 16% of the operational bridges in Pittsburgh were considered structurally deficient, and 22 of those 
51 deemed “structurally deficient” were principal arterial connections.40
• 
Pittsburgh and the surrounding river system contain 
23 locks and dams used to regulate water flow, transportation, and water supply to the city.39
Storm and wastewater management: 
• 9 billion gallons of combined stormwater and wastewater overflows yearly41
• 
ALCOSAN (the Allegheny County Sanitary Authority, which operates the only sewer treatment facility for 
Pittsburgh and 82 neighboring municipalities) is bound by an EPA consent decree to reduce combined sewer overflows by at least 85%.41
Natural gas conveyance: 
• 
A natural gas leak in the city’s conveyance system occurs every 2 miles.42
Housing and building stock:
• 
Most houses in Pittsburgh are over 60 years old.43
• 
Renter-occupied properties approaching a median age of 65 years.
Electricity grid: 
• 
During the polar vortex of 2014, a regional transmission operator lost 22% of its capacity.44
Due to the age and condition of much of the City of 
Pittsburgh’s infrastructure and with the potential strain placed on infrastructure due to extreme weather, the possibility of infrastructure failure is a growing concern. 
Because of the city’s dynamic topography of hills, valleys, and waterways, for instance, any failure to a key road, tunnel, or bridge could immobilize residents, potentially isolating thousands of individuals until access is restored.
Environmental degradation: air, water, and soil
Pittsburgh’s industrial past and aging infrastructure have led to air, water, and soil contamination. Pittsburgh still ranks among the top U.S. cities for worst air quality, and in wet weather, the combined sewer system overflows and spills raw sewage into the city’s rivers. Much of the current air, water, and soil degradation stems from Pittsburgh’s industrial legacy, when the sky was dark with smoke at noon.45 In 2012, EPA categorized the region as an air quality non-attainment area, and Pittsburgh’s air quality was 14th worst (24-hour PM2.5) in the country as of 2016.46 This represents an improvement over recent years, though health and environmental impacts of poor air quality persist. New industries moving into the city and the surrounding area, including an ethane cracker plant and hydraulic fracturing operations, will have additional environmental impacts.
Inequity based on class
While racial inequity is especially pronounced in Pittsburgh, the city looks similar to many other Northeast or Midwestern cities in terms of inequities based on income. Lower-income 
Pittsburghers of any race or ethnicity tend to have less access to services, worse educational outcomes, and poorer health than their middle- and high-income counterparts. Prolonged disinvestment in 
Pittsburgh’s inner-ring suburbs— particularly in the Monongahela Valley, where vacancy and crime are on the rise—could have spillover effects regionwide.47 
Opioid crisis 
Substance use disorders are becoming increasingly prevalent in Western Pennsylvania. Opioids are a class of drug often prescribed for pain, but recreational use of such drugs is often linked to substance use disorders, which are a contributing factor in its rising number of opioid overdose deaths. In 2014 and 2015, Pennsylvania—in particular, 
Allegheny, Westmoreland, and Washington counties within 
Western Pennsylvania—experienced some of the highest 
Fragmentation across governments and non-profits
Fragmentation challenges local governance and the ability to address endemic stresses facing Pittsburghers. The City of Pittsburgh alone includes 90 neighborhoods, while 
Allegheny County has 130 municipalities, and the tencounty metropolitan region includes over 900 government units. Each municipality has independent responsibility for managing infrastructure and administering many local services, making it far more difficult for the city to plan and collaborate with the diverse and plentiful local political entities. Concurrently, the City of Pittsburgh is home to over 3,100 non-profit organizations, many with overlapping missions, and often competing for the same resources. Finally, ongoing planning efforts related to climate action, inclusive economic development, stormwater management and other priorities abound in the city, demanding intentional integration in order to capitalize on the opportunity for cobenefits.  
Industrial legacy
Like many other Midwestern cities, Pittsburgh’s population and built infrastructure are both aging. Economic hardship in the late 20th century led to deferred maintenance of roads, bridges, and water and sewer management systems. 
As jobs left the city, Pittsburgh’s population started to shrink and baby boomers that remained began to age as the city struggled to retain young people for its workforce. 
Pittsburgh’s industrial past also led to a slew of air, water, and soil quality issues that plague the city to this day.
Aging population and workforce 
The proportion of elderly residents (age 65 and older) in 
Allegheny County was 16.7 percent in 2010, compared with 13 percent for the nation as a whole. This proportion is projected to grow to 21 percent by 2040, mirroring national demographic trends.12 An aging population poses challenges in terms of city and regional services, workforce maintenance and growth, and provision of healthcare and public health services. 
The proportion of baby boomers nearing retirement is especially large in Pittsburgh, where 1.2 million workers will need to be hired or up-skilled over the next 10 years. 
Some of Pittsburgh’s key industries will likely be hit by retirements, including energy, manufacturing, and utilities service delivery; these changes open opportunities for new jobs as traditional industries evolve or disappear. And while 
Pittsburgh has historically struggled to keep graduates of its universities in the area, over the last decade, there has been a 
29-percent increase in young graduates choosing to remain in the city.13 
Aging infrastructure
Much of Pittsburgh’s infrastructure, including transportation networks, water and sewer management systems, and housing stock, was constructed during the population boom of the early-mid 20th century (Figure 17). 
Select neighborhoods in the city have benefited from redevelopment over the past few decades, but deferred repairs and upgrades in many communities have left a capital burden that currently strains city and county resources. For example, Allegheny County’s sanitary sewer system, which services the city and 82 neighboring communities, is aging, poorly maintained, and inadequately sized to capture and treat stormwater during the region’s frequent wet weather events. Pittsburgh Water and Sewer Authority’s (PWSA) drinking water system is similarly strained, and loses at least one quarter of water treated at its single treatment plant to pipe leaks or bursts.38 And concerns are mounting about aging and corroding pipes releasing lead into drinking water.
Moreover, modernization of Pittsburgh’s energy and communications systems is required to help the city to achieve its goals of innovation and sustainability. The city relies on a large-scale, interconnected electricity distribution system. Temporary power outages are common in the city and are likely to increase as the energy grid is strained during extreme weather events. Aging infrastructure not only contributes to degradation in these networks but can also render the whole system vulnerable to widespread and cascading infrastructure failure.

[Page 17]
and cooling systems, place residents at increased risk of negative health effects stemming from extreme temperatures.
• 
Landslides and subsidence incidents regularly affect parts of the city and may only get worse. The city and region have a long history of coal extraction and related erosion, putting many areas at risk for subsidence and sink holes in addition to the landslide risk to Pittsburgh’s fragile hillsides. These risks are exacerbated by extreme weather events such as heavy rainfall. In fact, 900 structures within the city limits are considered to be in areas “very hazardous to landslides”, and all of Allegheny 
County is classified as a “high incidence” area for landslides.39,54 In recent years, landslides have occurred in the neighborhoods of Oakland, Greenfield, and 
Perry North. In 2014, wet weather caused a landslide on Mount Washington which covered 100 yards of rail lines, halting train traffic for 2 days.
Economic collapse
While Pittsburgh’s economy is increasingly reliant on the healthcare, education, and technology sectors, these sectors are also experiencing rapid changes. Pittsburgh’s “eds and meds” economy is in the spotlight as health care reform continues to be evaluated and increasing attention is paid to the cost of higher education. The volatility within these two drivers of Pittsburgh’s economy creates concern about the risk of a significant economic collapse, not unlike that of the steel industry in the mid-20th century. Moreover, general economic trends of globalization, automation, and reliance on technology may pose additional challenges for Pittsburgh’s key industries. However, these trends, if capitalized upon strategically, also have the potential to provide substantial economic opportunities given 
Pittsburgh’s growing technology startup sector. Finally, the significant proportion of Pittsburgh residents employed by non-profits would also be negatively impacted by changes in government contracts, public or private grant making, or charitable giving precipitated by, or independent of, other economic shifts. Increased venture capital funding for new startups and support for owner-occupied small businesses in the city’s neighborhoods would help to stave off negative impacts of major shifts in the city’s key industries. 
Hazardous materials incident
Hazardous materials, including oil and natural gas from the Marcellus and Utica shale formations, are transported directly through the City of Pittsburgh by road, rail, and barge multiple times per day, increasing the risk of an accident occurring within the city. Pittsburgh is a hub for a series of major transportation routes, including I-376, I-279, 
Route 28, Route 65, several rail lines, and the three rivers,39 and an estimated 1.5 million people in Pennsylvania live in an area that could be affected by a train derailment resulting in a fire.55 overdose deaths per capita of any region of the country.48 
Many experts now characterize the opioid problem in 
Western Pennsylvania and across the United States as a public health emergency, partially predicated on the breakdown of social services, sense of isolation, and dislocation from the new economy observed broadly in communities across the region.
Gender-based inequity
Women in Pittsburgh struggle with pay inequity.49 Pittsburgh also ranks 96th out of 100 metro areas in promoting womenowned businesses, and the city lags behind many other metro areas in growth of women-owned businesses. There has also recently been increased awareness of the ways in which racism and sexism impede the wellbeing, academic success, and positive development of Black girls and women in Pittsburgh, such as through higher poverty, school discipline, and exposure to violence.28 
Invasive species
Pittsburgh’s urban forest is one of its greatest assets: almost 
40,000 trees were inventoried in the city—amounting 41 percent of the city having tree cover—which has been found to provide substantial ecosystem services to the city each year.50-52 However, the region’s tree canopy is susceptible to pests, invasive species, and other risk factors. An alarming 
67 percent of the city’s tree canopy is at risk of destruction by the Asian longhorned beetle. The emerald ash borer was first identified in Pittsburgh in 2007 and attacks all ash trees, which make up nine percent of the city’s tree canopy. Other threats include fungus, disease, and invasive plant species. A decrease in tree canopy would not only reduce air and water quality and stormwater benefits, but destabilize hillsides as well.51  
POTENTIAL SHOCKS IN AN UNCERTAIN FUTURE
While the stresses Pittsburgh experiences erode resident wellbeing on a day-to-day basis, the potential for future catastrophic events looms on the horizon. While Pittsburgh’s geography protects it from a number of climate change impacts, the likelihood of severe weather and related shocks is expected to increase in the future.
Climate change and extreme weather
Pittsburgh confronts a variety of challenges from extreme weather, and most emerging evidence suggests that the risks will grow with climate change:
• 
Precipitation and flooding: Much of the city is adjacent to rivers and streams and their floodplains, and local weather patterns can produce a range of extreme precipitation events. Lack of capacity in the city’s stormwater management system, combined with Pittsburgh’s topography and changing weather patterns, have led to an increase in flash flooding in recent years. Such events have caused major disasters in the city’s history, but climate change could make extreme weather events in Pittsburgh either more frequent, more intense, or both. 
• 
Winter storms: Large winter storms are relatively common in Pennsylvania and are expected to happen more frequently. Major winter storms occur an average of five times per year in Pennsylvania, and since 2003, 
Pittsburgh has experienced three major snowstorms which led to emergency declarations.39 In the coming decades, the Northeastern United States is projected to experience a greater number of major winter storms, with an average precipitation increase of 5 to 20 percent.
• 
Extreme temperatures: Extreme hot and cold temperatures are expected to have a greater impact on the city in the future. Long and extended cold spells are common during winters in Pittsburgh. On the other hand, the climate is warming, and temperature fluctuations are increasing. Pittsburgh also experiences an “urban heat island effect,” in which cities with more thermal mass tend to be 1 to 3 degrees warmer than surrounding rural areas.53 Pittsburgh’s aging population and housing infrastructure, including outdated heating

[Page 18]
PITTSBURGH’S RESILIENCE FRAMEWORK
The analysis of Pittsburgh’s shocks and stresses, coupled with and participants (see appendix _ for methodology), informed the resilience goals and objectives that comprise Pittsburgh’s resilience framework. This framework describes not only how specific sectors will play a role in addressing the chronic stresses facing the city and preparing for potential shocks. 
Pittsburgh’s resilience goals are aligned with the p4 framework, which has been adopted by the City of Pittsburgh and partners city-wide to inspire urban development that is “innovative, inclusive, and sustainable.” The resilience framework adds specificity to p4, detailing specific objectives to be undertaken in order to meet Pittsburgh’s resilience goals (Figure 18). The framework is holistic and communitycentered, and acknowledges the integrated cross-sector activity that must also occur to achieve resilience. Resilience actions detail ongoing activities that provide resilience value because they address stresses and shocks as well as new 
PITTSBURGH’S RESILIENCE GOALS
PEOPLE
Pittsburgh will empower all residents to contribute to thriving and supportive communities by ensuring that basic needs are met. We will be an inclusive city of innovation that celebrates our diversity, and all residents will have equal access to resources and opportunity
PLACE
Pittsburgh will use land to benefit all residents; to increase social cohesion, connectivity, public and ecological health; and to protect against current and future risks. We will design, scale, and maintain our infrastructure for current and future needs, providing benefits and services to our neighborhoods during times of calm and crisis.
 
PLANET
Pittsburgh will achieve long-term environmental health through wise stewardship, improved use of our resources, and a reduced carbon footprint
PERFORMANCE
Pittsburgh will work closely with neighbors and partners for improved planning and decision-making
Figure 18 shows the p4 framework with Pittsburgh’s resilience objectives. Figure 19 shows the linkage between goals, objectives, and actions.
Figure 18. p4 and Pittsburgh’s resilience objectives
Figure 19. Mapping of resilience goals to actions 
Figure notes: This figure depicts the ways that Pittsburgh’s resilience goals, objectives, and actions nest to comprise the resilience framework foundational to the Pittsburgh resilience strategy.
• Transportation
• Recapitalized infrastructure
• Mixed uses
• Vacant land
• Green space
• Public space
• Communications
• Commercial transport
• Disaster Reliability
• Water
• Local and renewable energy
• Resource efficiency
• Natural infrastructure
• Resilient design
• Entrepreneurship
• Civic engagement
• Collaboration
• Measurement
• Housing
• Health
• Food
• Safety
• Education
• Emergency preparedness
• Resilient households
• Workforce development
• Diversity
ACTION A
ACTION B
ACTION C
ACTION C
ACTION D
ACTION E
OBJECTIVE 1
OBJECTIVE 2

[Page 19]
ALIGNING ACTIONS FOR MAXIMUM BENEFITS understand the implementation status of city and regional actions that help realize resilience objectives. actions but also better coordination, amplification, and acceleration of ongoing governmental and nongovernmental activities and initiatives. 
• 
Initiate: Develop and implement new initiatives. Next steps entail identifying lead organizations and assembling working groups to begin action plans.
• 
Coordinate: Align ongoing actions with multiple owners and actors to a common set of goals. 
Next steps involve determining governance processes and roles and responsibilities for diverse partners.
• 
Amplify: Expand scope, reach, and/or impact of pilot or recently initiated actions. Next steps entail identifying the ways in which actions ought to be expanded, additional resources required, and plans or proposals for new funding resources.
• 
Accelerate: Support the implementation and/or uptake of existing actions with established leadership and concrete next steps. Next steps involve creating action plans to fast-track specific elements of each action group.
implementation, with example actions included. Appendix A of the strategy provides a full list of actions sorted in this way, along with further detail.
Figure 25. Taxonomy for implementing resilience actions with select examples
Initiate
Coordinate
Amplify
Accelerate
Develop and implement new initiatives. 
Next steps entail identifying lead organizations and assembling working groups to begin action plans.
Align ongoing actions with multiple owners and actors to a common set of goals. Next steps; involve determining governance processes and roles and responsibilities for diverse partners.
Expand scope, reach, and/or impact of pilot or recently initiated actions. Next steps entail identifying the ways in which actions ought to be expanded, additional resources required, and plans or proposals for new funding resources.
Support the implementation and/or uptake of existing actions with established leadership and concrete next steps. Next steps involve creating action plans to fasttrack specific elements of each action group.

[Page 20]
HOUSING............................................................
Goal: Affordable housing
HEALTH...............................................................
Goal: Long, healthy lives
FOOD...................................................................
Goal: Access & health
SAFETY................................................................
Goal: Public safety & inclusion
EDUCATION.......................................................
Goal: High-quality learning
EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS....................
Goal: Long, healthy lives
RESILIENT HOUSEHOLDS............................
Goal: Safety & security
WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT.....................
Goal: Eliminate barriers
DIVERSITY..........................................................
Goal: Attract & retain talent
PEOPLE
PITTSBURGH WILL 
EMPOWER ALL RESIDENTS 
TO CONTRIBUTE TO 
A THRIVING AND 
SUPPORTIVE COMMUNITY 
BY ENSURING THAT BASIC 
NEEDS ARE MET.
PITTSBURGH WILL BE 
AN INCLUSIVE CITY 
OF INNOVATION THAT 
CELEBRATES DIVERSITY, 
IN WHICH ALL RESIDENTS 
WILL HAVE EQUAL ACCESS 
TO RESOURCES WITH THE 
ABILITY TO LEVERAGE 
OPPORTUNITY.

[Page 21]
HOUSING 
PRICES 
ARE 
ON 
THE 
RISE IN MANY OF PITTSBURGH’S 
NEIGHBORHOODS, 
GENTRIFICATION 
IS THREATENING THE ABILITY OF 
LONG-TERM RESIDENTS TO STAY IN 
THEIR HOMES, AND PITTSBURGHERS 
CONTINUE TO PAY SOME OF THE 
HIGHEST ENERGY PRICES IN THE 
COUNTRY. PRESERVING AFFORDABILITY 
AS THE CITY CONTINUES TO GROW 
WILL BE CRITICAL TO MAINTAINING 
THE TRADITIONAL CHARACTER AND 
SOCIAL 
CONNECTIVITY 
WITHIN 
PITTSBURGH’S NEIGHBORHOODS.
STRESSES & SHOCKS ADDRESSED
Inequity: Affordable housing
Aging infrastructure
ACTIONS FOR IMPLEMENTATION
• 
Preserve and develop affordable housing 
• 
Promoting equitable development 
• 
Creating green and healthy homes
• 
Supporting veterans and homeless 
FEATURED ACTION: Promoting equitable devel­ opment
LEAD: Partner lead(s)
STAGE: Coordinate
Equitable development is a “positive development strategy that ensures everyone participates in and benefits from the region’s economic transformation—especially low-income residents, communities of color, immigrants, and others at risk of being left behind.” A recent PolicyLink report developed a set of recommendations for eliminating racial inequities and ensuring that all Pittsburghers have the opportunity to live in healthy and safe neighborhoods, to connect to economic opportunity and wealth generation, and to participate in decision-making. Neighborhood 
Allies, UrbanInnovation21, and other partnering organizations have begun working to implement these recommendations.
Provide safe, affordable, and sustainable housing in new development or redevelopment
Figure notes: This map shows the Market Value Analysis (MVA) clusters within the city of Pittsburgh. MVA is a statistical tool that uses market data to classify geo­ graphic areas and produce a map of the varying market types within the city. Each color on the map represents one of nine distinct market types. Market types are designated according to clustering of similar characteristics, such as residential sales price or vacancy levels. Source: City of Pittsburgh, Department of City Planning, 
2017.56
FEATURED SUB-ACTION: Affordable Housing 
Task Force recommendations
LEAD: City of Pittsburgh 
STAGE: Accelerate
The city’s Affordable Housing Task Force, in partnership with community-based organizations and neighborhood coalitions, has developed a suite of recommendations, policies, programs, and initiatives that aim to address the growing issue of access to affordable housing in Pittsburgh. 
Additionally, financing programs and community outreach efforts are focused on improving the quality and sustainability of Pittsburgh’s existing (and aging) housing stock in order to keep the total cost of housing affordable.

[Page 22]
THOUGH 
PITTSBURGH 
IS 
KNOWN 
FOR ITS CENTERS OF HEALTHCARE 
EXCELLENCE, 
THE 
CITY 
ALSO 
EXPERIENCES DISPARITIES IN HEALTH 
RISKS 
AND 
OUTCOMES 
ALONG 
RACIAL AND ECONOMIC LINES, AND 
AS A RESULT OF ITS INDUSTRIAL 
LEGACY. 
WESTERN 
PENNSYLVANIA 
IS AN EPICENTER OF THE EMERGING 
NATIONAL 
OPIOID 
EPIDEMIC. 
A 
ALL PITTSBURGHERS TO LIVE THEIR 
BEST, HEALTHIEST LIVES.
STRESSES & SHOCKS ADDRESSED
Inequity: health
Aging population
Opioid epidemic
ACTIONS FOR IMPLEMENTATION
• 
Implementing a Public Health 3.0 model
• 
Addressing the opioid epidemic
• 
Improving outdoor and indoor air quality
• 
Providing food security and healthy food access 
• 
Support aging Pittsburghers and those with disabilities
• 
Integrating social services into Pittsburgh 
Public Schools (PPS Community Schools) 
• 
Creating green and healthy homes 
• 
Supporting veterans and homeless 
Pittsburghers 
100RC NETWORK SHARING HIGHLIGHT:
Pittsburgh and Glasgow Welding Health Equity and Resilience Together (PGWT)
LEAD: Partner lead(s)
STAGE: Coordinate
This project, led by the Consumer Health Coalition 
Allegheny County Health Department (ACHD), 
Resilient Glasgow and the Glasgow Centre for 
Population Health, will accelerate the development of an actionable, merged resilience and health equity strategy based on lessons learned from 
Glasgow’s approach and experience. It seeks to weld “health equity thinking” with “resilience thinking” together in a way that will profoundly influence Pittsburgh’s culture of health. The work in Pittsburgh and in other cities across the network shows there is a great opportunity to foster these connections both domestically and internationally. 
Improve the physical and mental health and wellbeing of all Pittsburghers
PLATFORM PARTNER ACTION: Crisis Information 
Management Technology Assessment and Pilot
LEAD: Crisis Information Management Technology 
Assessment and Pilot 
POSSIBLE PLATFORM PARTNER: Intermedix and the University of Pittsburgh’s Graduate School of Public Health to assess resources and identify gaps in emergency management and public health preparedness requirements and functions. 
A simulated exercise will assume a compounding inversion, extended heat wave and air pollution event, and look at the policy levers, emergency management response, and financing options to ensure maximum population health. 
FULL-SERVICE 
GROCERY 
STORES, 
FARMERS’ 
MARKETS 
AND 
STANDS, 
COMMUNITY AND SCHOOL GARDENS, 
AND SELECT CONVENIENCE STORES 
SUPPLY PITTSBURGHERS WITH HEALTHY 
FOODS THAT CONTRIBUTE TO IMPROVED 
OVERALL HEALTH. HOWEVER, THESE 
RESOURCES 
ARE 
NOT 
DISTRIBUTED 
EQUITABLY THROUGHOUT THE CITY AND 
MAY CONTRIBUTE TO DISPARITIES IN 
OBESITY AND CHRONIC DISEASE AS WELL 
AS FOOD INSECURITY. IN FACT, AROUND 
14 PERCENT OF PITTSBURGH RESIDENTS 
STRUGGLE WITH FOOD SECURITY.56 A 
THE WELLBEING OF ALL OF THE CITY’S 
COMMUNITIES 
AND 
ENSURE 
THAT 
FOODS TO ENABLE HEALTHY LIVING ARE 
ACCESSIBLE TO ALL.
STRESSES & SHOCKS ADDRESSED
Inequity: Food access and health
ACTIONS FOR IMPLEMENTATION
• 
Providing food security and healthy food access
• 
Supporting local and urban agriculture 
• 
Integrating social services into Pittsburgh 
Public Schools (PPS Community Schools) 
Improve access to healthy, affordable food choices
412 Food Rescue works with food retailers, wholesalers, restaurants, caterers, universities and other food providers to rescue un-sellable but perfectly good food. Volunteers collect fresh, healthy food that would otherwise be discarded and directly distribute to community organizations that serve those in need. 412 Food Rescue utilizes app technology to aggregate and match food donors and beneficiaries and mobilizes a community of volunteers to efficiently transport food between locations.

[Page 23]
PITTSBURGH 
HAS 
BEEN 
DEFINED 
BY ITS NEIGHBORHOODS OVER ITS 
HISTORY AND IS RECENTLY GAINING 
RECOGNITION FOR ITS QUALITY OF 
LIFE AND LIVABILITY (MOST LIVABLE 
CITY, BEST PLACE TO RETIRE, ETC.). 
HOWEVER, NOT ALL OF THE CITY’S 
NEIGHBORHOODS ARE SHARING IN THE 
SAME PROSPERITY: THE CITY IS HIGHLY 
SEGREGATED, CRIME AND VIOLENCE 
PLAGUE 
MANY 
NEIGHBORHOODS, 
AND NEW DEVELOPMENT THREATENS 
TO DEEPEN CULTURAL DIVIDES. AS 
PITTSBURGH 
WORKS 
TO 
BECOME 
MORE 
RESILIENT, 
ITS 90 
UNIQUE 
NEIGHBORHOODS 
WILL 
RETAIN 
THEIR 
CULTURE 
WHILE 
BUILDING 
SOCIAL CONNECTIVITY AMONG ALL 
COMMUNITIES ACROSS THE CITY.
STRESSES & SHOCKS ADDRESSED
Inequity: Public safety
ACTIONS FOR IMPLEMENTATION
• 
Improving community-police relations 
• 
Confronting and overcoming structural barriers and racism 
• 
Supporting job and life skills for Pittsburgh’s youth of color 
FEATURED ACTION: Community policing initiatives
LEAD: City of Pittsburgh, Department of Public 
Safety, Bureau of Police
STAGE: Amplify
As a participant in the U.S. Department of Justice’s 
National Initiative for Building Community Trust and 
Justice, Pittsburgh’s community policing initiatives are in the spotlight. Ongoing efforts in community outreach, technology-assisted citizen engagement, and open police data can be amplified to achieve a greater impact on public safety and improved community-police relations.
Invest in and support safe, inclusive, and cohesive neighborhoods for all Pittsburghers
FEATURED SUB-ACTION: Pittsburgh Peace and 
Justice Initiative 
LEAD: Pittsburgh Black Elected Officials Coalition 
STAGE: Amplify
The Pittsburgh Peace and Justice Initiative (P&JI) convened residents from across the city to create a community-informed policy agenda. Under the direction of the Pittsburgh Black Elected Officials 
Coalition, the P&JI was founded to “increase public safety, improve quality of life, and ensure the delivery of fair and impartial public safety services” among constituents in the City of Pittsburgh.
The initiative endeavors to create or facilitate:
1. An ongoing and systematic black community engagement process;
2. A resident-informed Peace and Justice Policy 
Agenda
3. The implementation of the Peace and Justice 
Policy Agenda utilizing all interested stakeholders and available resources; and 
4. A stronger partnership between city, county and state governments and Pittsburgh’s black communities to improve public safety and overall quality of life in those communities.

[Page 24]
FEATURED SUB-ACTION: Articulating connections between students and resources to serve PPS students more effectively
LEAD: The Pittsburgh Promise, Pittsburgh Public 
Schools, Department of Human Services, United 
Way, OnHand Schools 
STAGE: Initiate
Consolidating student information and streamlining access to resources that are currently dispersed across agencies will result in a more robust information system. Articulating transparent protocols for connecting students to available resources will better serve student needs. This effort will increase the collective impact of current programs, services, and education initiatives by improving communication and coordination between and among professionals and the families they support. The goal is to connect more students to the resources they want and need when they want and need them so they can succeed in school and after graduation. 4. A stronger partnership between city, county and state governments and Pittsburgh’s black communities to improve public safety and overall quality of life in those communities.
 
AS 
PITTSBURGH’S 
WORKFORCE 
AGES, THE CITY’S SCHOOLS HAVE 
THE OPPORTUNITY TO CREATE AN “ESCALATOR 
OF 
OPPORTUNITY,” 
HELPING 
STUDENTS 
BUILD 
THE 
SKILLS NECESSARY TO FILL VACANT 
POSITIONS 
AND 
PARTICIPATE 
IN 
PITTSBURGH’S EVOLVING ECONOMY. 
PITTSBURGH’S PRIMARY EDUCATION 
SYSTEM IS PLAGUED BY ACHIEVEMENT 
GAPS BY RACE/ETHNICITY, AND THERE 
IS UNEQUAL ACCESS TO QUALITY EARLY 
EDUCATION IN THE CITY.28 A QUALITY 
PUBLIC EDUCATION SYSTEM CITYWIDE 
CREATES EQUITY OF OPPORTUNITY 
FOR PITTSBURGHERS, AND LOCAL 
INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER EDUCATION, 
ALONG WITH THE CITY’S CULTURAL 
ASSETS, CONTRIBUTE TO LEARNING 
ACROSS THE LIFESPAN. 
STRESSES & SHOCKS ADDRESSED
Inequity: Education and employment
Aging population and workforce
Economic collapse
ACTIONS FOR IMPLEMENTATION
• 
Providing 21st century education for youth 
• 
Providing pre-K for all of Pittsburgh’s children 
• 
Integrating data systems to serve PPS students more effectively (Student Connections) 
• 
Integrating social services into Pittsburgh 
Public Schools (PPS Community Schools) 
FEATURED ACTION: Providing pre-K for all of 
Pittsburgh’s children
LEAD: City of Pittsburgh and partners
STAGE: Initiate
Pittsburgh’s children currently have unequal access to pre-K education, resulting in disparities in educational outcomes later in life. The City of Pittsburgh plans to pursue the funding, organizational structure, and capacity necessary to ensure pre-K is available to all of Pittsburgh’s children.
Provide access for all to high-quality and engaging education to support wellbeing, informed citizens, and the workforce of the future
AT THEIR MOST FUNDAMENTAL LEVEL, 
RESILIENT CITIES ENSURE RESIDENTS’ 
BASIC NEEDS ARE MET IN THE FACE OF 
DISASTER. ANTICIPATING INCREASED 
RISK OF FLOODING, SEVERE WINTER 
STORMS, AND HIGHER TEMPERATURES 
DUE TO CLIMATE CHANGE, A RESILIENT 
PITTSBURGH 
WILL 
ESTABLISH 
RESOURCES AND PROCEDURES TO 
ENSURE 
EMERGENCY 
ACCESS 
TO 
FOOD, SHELTER, AND WATER FOR 
RESIDENTS.
STRESSES & SHOCKS ADDRESSED
Fragmentation
All acute shocks
ACTIONS FOR IMPLEMENTATION
• 
Improving disaster preparedness and response (THIRA and Hazard Mitigation Plan Update) 
• 
Providing food security and healthy food access
Provide access to emergency food, water, and shelter for all residents during times of catastrophe

[Page 25]
EMERGENCY RESPONSE OFTEN OCCURS 
AT THE HOUSEHOLD LEVEL. IMMEDIATE 
HELP 
FOLLOWING 
A 
DISASTER 
MAY 
NOT BE AVAILABLE, SO IT IS IMPORTANT 
FOR INDIVIDUALS AND FAMILIES TO 
BE KNOWLEDGEABLE AND READY TO 
RESPOND IN CASE OF AN EMERGENCY. 
IN 
LIGHT 
OF 
PITTSBURGH’S 
AGING 
POPULATION, PREPARING FAMILIES AND 
NEIGHBORS TO CONSIDER THE WELLBEING 
OF SENIORS WILL BE INCREASINGLY 
IMPORTANT. 
THE 
DEPARTMENTS 
OF 
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND PUBLIC 
SAFETY SHOULD CONTINUE TO WORK 
TOGETHER TO PROVIDE THE NECESSARY 
TRAINING, TOOLS, AND SUPPORT NEEDED.
STRESSES & SHOCKS ADDRESSED
Aging population and workforce
All acute shocks
ACTIONS FOR IMPLEMENTATION
• 
Encouraging neighborhood-based grassroots efforts
• 
Improving disaster preparedness and response (THIRA and Hazard Mitigation 
Plan Update) 
• 
Enhancing civic education and engagement
• 
Creating green and healthy homes
• 
Enhancing city government-to-citizen communication
FEATURED ACTION: Love Your [Resilient] Block 
Grants
PARTNERS: Cities of Service, Peoples Natural 
Gas, ioby
STAGE: Coordinate
Block grants are an initiative that invites organizations to submit project proposals that can transform their blocks with up to $1,500 and the support of city departments. With these grant funds, winning groups can purchase supplies, engage their neighbors, and roll up their sleeves to build resilience block by block. Projects may include, but are not limited to, creating green spaces, implementing stormwater capture, enhancing parks, streetscaping, removing graffiti and litter, sprucing up pathways, and building emergency preparedness.
Ensure that Pittsburgh households are prepared to respond to emergency situations
HIGH RATES OF POVERTY, UN- AND 
UNDEREMPLOYMENT, 
AND 
AN 
INEQUITABLE 
EDUCATION 
SYSTEM 
CONTINUE TO IMPACT MANY OF 
PITTSBURGH’S 
COMMUNITIES, 
PARTICULARLY THOSE OF COLOR. AS 
PITTSBURGH’S CURRENT WORKFORCE 
AGES AND THE ECONOMY CONTINUES 
TO TRANSFORM, THE CITY IS PRESENTED 
WITH AN OPPORTUNITY TO DEVELOP 
THE 
SKILLS 
OF 
TRADITIONALLY 
DISADVANTAGED 
RESIDENTS 
TO 
SECURE LIVING WAGE JOBS.
STRESSES & SHOCKS ADDRESSED
Inequity: Education, employment, income
Aging population and workforce
Economic collapse
ACTIONS FOR IMPLEMENTATION
• 
Developing and retraining Pittsburgh’s workforce
• 
Supporting job and life skills for Pittsburgh’s youth of color 
• 
Stimulating small business development
• 
Establishing a welcoming and diverse community (Welcoming Pittsburgh) 
• 
Providing 21st century education for youth 
100RC NETWORK SHARING HIGHLIGHT: 
Workforce development sharing with DaNang large-scale workforce development actions, including actions to help the city better understand the linkages between demand from employers and skills among the city’s workforce as well as training options for those residents. Sharing via both the Sister City and 
100RC networks will allow Pittsburgh and DaNang to collaborate on their shared workforce challenges.
Eliminate barriers to opportunity for education and employment for all Pittsburghers
100RC PLATFORM PARTNER HIGHLIGHT: 
Pittsburgh companies Manchester-Bidwell and 
Fourth Economy join 100RC’s Platform Partner network
Pittsburgh has contributed some of its own talent to the 100RC network of global experts. In 2016, 
Manchester-Bidwell and Fourth Economy joined the Platform Partner network, offering their services in workforce development programming and economic development consulting, respectively.

[Page 26]
AS 
PITTSBURGH’S 
POPULATION 
AND WORKFORCE AGE AND THE 
CITY 
CONTINUES 
TO 
STRUGGLE 
WITH RELATIVELY LOW POPULATION 
GROWTH RATES, MAYOR BILL PEDUTO 
HOPES TO ATTRACT AT LEAST 20,000 
RESIDENTS IN THE NEXT 10 YEARS. 
A 
VIBRANT 
AND 
RESILIENT 
CITY 
WILL CREATE WORKING AND LIVING 
ENVIRONMENTS 
THAT 
NURTURE 
CURRENT RESIDENTS AND ATTRACT 
NEW PEOPLE TO THE CITY, OFFERING 
ECONOMIC 
OPPORTUNITY 
AND 
CELEBRATING CULTURAL DIVERSITY 
AS 
WELL 
AS 
THE 
TRADITIONAL 
PITTSBURGH ETHOS. 
STRESSES & SHOCKS ADDRESSED
Inequity: Education, employment, income
Aging population and workforce
Economic collapse
ACTIONS FOR IMPLEMENTATION
• 
Establishing a welcoming and diverse community (Welcoming Pittsburgh) 
• 
Supporting job and life skills for 
Pittsburgh’s youth of color 
• 
Confronting and overcoming structural barriers and racism 
• 
Promoting equitable development 
Develop, attract, and retain the best and most diverse talent for Pittsburgh’s workforce
FEATURED ACTION: Welcoming Pittsburgh
LEAD: City of Pittsburgh, Office of the Mayor
STAGE: Amplify
Mayor Peduto’s Welcoming Pittsburgh Plan aims to improve the lives of immigrants and long-time residents alike by creating informed, diverse, and welcoming experiences throughout the city. Derived from community and Advisory Council input, the plan includes a broad set of recommendations in three categories: Welcome, Neighbor! (creating community connections), Bridge to the City (linking to government services, policy, and housing), and Prospering Together (promoting economic opportunity).

[Page 27]
TRANSPORTATION.........................................
Goal: Multi-modal transportation options
RECAPITALIZED INFRASTRUCTURE.........
Goal: Improve physical infrastructure
MIXED USES......................................................
Goal: Serve multiple needs
VACANT LAND.................................................
Goal: Repurpose underutilized land 
GREEN SPACE...................................................
Goal: Connect communities with nature
PUBLIC SPACE..................................................
Goal: Create & maintain refuge space
COMMUNICATIONS.....................................
Goal: Accessible, modern communication
COMMERCIAL TRANSPORT........................
Goal: Improve reliability
DISASTER RELIABILITY.................................
Goal: Ensure reliable performance 
PLACE
PIT TSBURGH PIT TSBURGH 
WILL USE LAND 
SYSTEMATICALLY 
TO BENEFIT ALL 
RESIDENTS; TO INCREASE 
SOCIAL COHESION, 
CONNEC TIVIT Y, PUBLIC 
AND ECOLOGICAL 
HEALTH; AND TO PROTEC T 
AGAINST CURRENT AND 
FUTURE RISKS.
PIT TSBURGH WILL DESIGN, 
SCALE, AND MAINTAIN 
INFRASTRUC TURE FOR 
CURRENT AND FUTURE 
NEEDS EQUITABLY AND 
SUSTAINABLY, PROVIDING 
BENEFITS AND SERVICES 
TO THE REGION DURING 
TIMES OF CALM AND

[Page 28]
PITTSBURGH’S 
TRANSPORTATION 
NETWORK IS CONSTRAINED BY THE 
RIVERS AND HILLS THAT CHARACTERIZE 
THE 
CITY’S 
LANDSCAPE. 
MOVING 
FORWARD, INCREASING ACCESS TO 
MOBILITY IN THE FACE OF THESE 
FACTORS IS CRUCIAL TO CREATING 
A THRIVING URBAN ENVIRONMENT 
IN TIMES OF CALM AND HELPING 
COMMUNITIES 
ACCESS 
CRITICAL 
SERVICES AFTER A DISASTER.
STRESSES & SHOCKS ADDRESSED
Inequity: Mobility
Aging infrastructure
Aging population
Environmental degradation
Climate change impacts
ACTIONS FOR IMPLEMENTATION
• 
Enabling multi-modal transportation
• 
Developing a smart transportation system
• 
Supporting aging Pittsburghers and those with disabilities
FEATURED ACTION: Enabling multi-modal transportation
LEAD: City of Pittsburgh, Department of Mobility and Infrastructure and partners
STATUS: Coordinate
Advocacy groups, non-profit organizations, city and county departments, and county- and region-level coalitions and planning organizations are currently working to expand multi-modal transportation opportunities in and around Pittsburgh. From policy changes that mandate complete streets to physical infrastructure construction to Port Authority service changes to various recommendations in reports and plans at different stages of implementation, the city is not lacking in activity or enthusiasm in this arena. Coordinating activities will help ensure that expanded options continue to be realized for Pittsburghers in all parts of the city.
Connect all communities to economic opportunity and green spaces with safe, reliable, and convenient multi-modal transportation 
Figure notes: This map shows the key transportation corridors in the city, including Healthy Ride bike share stations, light rail, key bus corridors (defined by stretches of roadway covered by multiple bus routes), bus-ways, and major roads and highways connecting neighborhoods throughout the city. Source: City of 
Pittsburgh, 2016.17
Figure 21. Key public transit corridors in Pittsburgh
PITTSBURGH HAS ENOUGH PHYSICAL 
INFRASTRUCTURE (ROADWAYS, 
BRIDGES, 
WATER 
AND 
WASTE 
MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS, ETC.) TO 
SUPPORT 
A 
POPULATION 
TWICE 
ITS 
CURRENT 
SIZE. 
STRATEGIC 
COORDINATION 
AND 
PLANNING 
CAN 
HELP 
TRANSFORM 
AGING 
INFRASTRUCTURE INTO AN ASSET 
RATHER THAN A RISK.
STRESSES & SHOCKS ADDRESSED
Fragmentation
Aging infrastructure
ACTIONS FOR IMPLEMENTATION
• 
Putting city facilities to their best and highest uses (Strategic Investment & 
Maintenance Plan) 
• 
Developing a smart transportation system 
Maintain and improve existing physical infrastructure for the long term

[Page 29]
PITTSBURGH 
IS 
MADE 
UP 
OF 
DISTINCT 
AND 
OFTEN 
DISCONNECTED 
NEIGHBORHOODS 
AT VARIOUS STAGES OF NEGLECT, 
VACANCY, 
REDEVELOPMENT, 
AND 
STABILITY. 
RESIDENTS 
OF 
MANY 
NEIGHBORHOODS AND OF VARIOUS 
SOCIOECONOMIC 
POSITIONS 
FEEL 
STRONGLY 
CONNECTED 
TO 
ONE ANOTHER AND HAVE A SENSE 
OF 
NEIGHBORHOOD 
PRIDE. 
ALL 
NEIGHBORHOODS 
IN 
THE 
CITY 
SHOULD BENEFIT FROM ACCESS TO 
HOUSING, COMMERCIAL AMENITIES, 
JOB CENTERS, AND GREEN SPACE. 
STRESSES & SHOCKS ADDRESSED
Inequity
Aging infrastructure
Environmental degradation
Climate change impacts
ACTIONS FOR IMPLEMENTATION
• 
Designing and constructing smart and sustainable redevelopment projects 
• 
Promoting equitable development
Support a mix of uses in neighborhoods and communities that serve multiple needs
FEATURED SUB-ACTION: Complete Streets
LEAD: City of Pittsburgh 
In April 2015, Mayor Peduto signed an executive order calling for a city-wide policy on Complete 
Streets and an adoption of design guidelines. After an internal policy workshop and public meeting, the City drafted a policy to help redesign streets to better meet the needs of all users. This policy will work in tandem with other ongoing comprehensive planning efforts of the Department of City Planning, including the Mobility Plan.
FEATURED SUB-ACTION: Eco Innovation 
District 
LEAD: City of Pittsburgh 
Focused on the Uptown and West Oakland communities, the Ecoinnovation District Plan will create a new model for urban growth that is inclusive, innovative, and environmentally sound. The project is the product of ongoing collaboration among 
Uptown 
Partners of 
Pittsburgh, Oakland Planning and Development 
Corporation, City of Pittsburgh, Sustainable 
Pittsburgh, Urban Redevelopment Authority of 
Pittsburgh, Port Authority of Allegheny County, and Allegheny County Economic Development, neighborhood residents and groups, universities, and other partners.
100RC NETWORK SHARING HIGHLIGHT: 
Community-led land use planning sharing with Melbourne action around “community-led neighborhood renewal and development pilot projects,” which brings developers and local residents together to test tools and frameworks for collaborating and sharing in decision-making, work in conjunction with academics to measure results, and contribute to a body of public guidance on participatory planning. This type of approach would promote Pittsburgh’s resilience objectives related to land use planning, civic engagement, collaboration, and measurement.

[Page 30]
BLIGHT AND VACANCY MAR MANY 
OF PITTSBURGH’S NEIGHBORHOODS, 
ESPECIALLY THOSE IN ITS NORTHSIDE, 
WEST, AND EAST ENDS THAT HAVE NOT 
PREVIOUSLY RECEIVED DEVELOPMENT 
AND REDEVELOPMENT INVESTMENT. 
VACANT AND UNDERUTILIZED LAND 
HAS THE POTENTIAL TO BECOME 
A COMMUNITY ASSET, PROVIDING 
SPACE 
FOR 
RECREATION, 
URBAN 
AGRICULTURE, STORMWATER CAPTURE, 
PUBLIC ART, AND MORE. VACANT 
BUILDINGS, 
INCLUDING 
HOMES, 
CHURCHES, 
AND 
COMMERCIAL 
BUILDINGS THAT CURRENTLY SIGNAL 
NEIGHBORHOOD 
DISINVESTMENT 
ARE ALSO ASSETS FOR HELPING TO 
ACHIEVE OTHER RESILIENCE GOALS, 
INCLUDING AFFORDABLE HOUSING, 
SOCIAL COHESION, AND EMERGENCY 
SHELTERING.
STRESSES & SHOCKS ADDRESSED
Inequity
Aging infrastructure
Environmental degradation
Climate change: Flooding, extreme heat
ACTIONS FOR IMPLEMENTATION
• 
Recycling Pittsburgh’s land for its best and highest use
• 
Preserving and developing affordable housing
• 
Supporting local and urban agriculture
FEATURED SUB-ACTION: Hays Woods
LEAD: Partner lead(s)
In 2016, the City of Pittsburgh acquired 660 acres and the mineral rights to land known as Hays Woods, which will eventually become the city’s largest park. 
Past private ownership had planned the site for strip mining, a casino and a racetrack, all of which fell through and led to the City’s purchase for $5 million. 
The unmanaged property boasts beautiful views of the Monongahela riverfront and wildlife including a celebrated family of bald eagles. 
Repurpose underutilized land and building stock in vulnerable places for community benefit
Figure Notes: This map depicts the number of condemned and foreclosed buildings and tax-delinquent and vacant parcels in Pittsburgh. The areas with the greatest number of vacant, condemned, or foreclosed parcels include the Hill District, Garfield, Homewood, Lincoln-Lemington Belmar; Larimer in the East End of Pittsburgh; and areas on Pittsburgh’s Northside, including Perry South and Fineview. Hays, in the southeastern corner of the city limits, is largely open space and will be converted into a city park. Source: City of Pittsburgh, 2017.58
FEATURED SUB-ACTION: Open Space Plan
LEAD: City of Pittsburgh 
OpenSpacePGH is our city’s first comprehensive guide to the optimal use of its vacant, green, and recreation spaces. As one of twelve components of PlanPGH, this plan provides clear instructions and guidelines for land use and infrastructure decisions related to the ownership, management, maintenance, connectivity, and programming of 
Pittsburgh’s open space system.
Figure 22. Blight in Pittsburgh by neighborhood

[Page 31]
PITTSBURGH 
IS 
ENDOWED 
WITH 
A WEALTH OF GREEN AND “BLUE” 
SPACE—NATURAL INFRASTRUCTURE—
IN THE FORMS OF ITS LARGE AND 
DIVERSE 
PARKS, 
RIVERS, 
AND 
STREAMS. WHETHER THEY ARE AWARE 
OF 
IT 
OR 
NOT, 
PITTSBURGHERS 
ALREADY 
BENEFIT 
FROM 
THESE 
RESOURCES, WHICH CAN HELP TO 
IMPROVE AIR AND WATER QUALITY, 
REDUCE STORMWATER FLOWS, AND 
LOWER EXPOSURE TO URBAN HEAT 
ISLAND EFFECTS. PITTSBURGH HAS 
THE 
OPPORTUNITY 
TO 
ENHANCE 
RESIDENTS’ 
APPRECIATION 
AND 
UTILIZATION OF NATURAL RESOURCES 
AND TO IMPROVE HUMAN HEALTH AND 
ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION.
STRESSES & SHOCKS ADDRESSED
Environmental degradation
Climate change: Flooding, extreme heat
ACTIONS FOR IMPLEMENTATION
• 
Conserving, investing in, and connecting to nature (Biophilic city)
• 
Recycling Pittsburgh’s land for its best and highest use
• 
Supporting local and urban agriculture
FEATURED SUB-ACTION: Greenways 2.0
LEAD: City of Pittsburgh, Department of City 
Planning
The city’s Greenways 2.0 initiative is designed to expand and enhance the city’s greenways. This will involve developing a network of hiking and mountain biking trails, expanding the existing multi-use trail network, enhancing outdoor recreational opportunities, and managing invasive species. The city intends to accomplish these goals by fostering hands-on involvement from residents and building partnerships with organizations across the city.
Ensure that each community in Pittsburgh is connected to nature
Figure notes: This map shows the walking distance to the nearest accessible green space from each parcel in the City of Pittsburgh. Access to the rivers or other water bodies is also counted but only if a walking path to the river front is present. Steep slopes are excluded, as is green space with no usable walking point of entry. Neighborhoods of note with areas of limited walking access to green space include Brookline and portions of Mt. Washington, Carrick, Knoxville, and Allentown (South Side); Greenfield, Shadyside, North Oakland, and portions of Squirrel Hill and Homewood (East End); and Uptown/Bluff. Source: City of 
Pittsburgh, 2016.59-61
Figure 23. Walking access to green space in Pittsburgh
PITTSBURGH’S 
NUMEROUS 
PUBLIC 
SPACES, INCLUDING GREEN SPACE, 
PUBLIC 
SQUARES, 
AND 
PUBLIC 
BUILDINGS, ENRICH THE LIVES OF 
CITY RESIDENTS YEAR-ROUND. THESE 
SPACES MAY PROVIDE CO-BENEFITS 
IF 
MAINTAINED 
AND 
UTILIZED 
STRATEGICALLY 
AS 
GATHERING 
PLACES, SHELTER, FOOD DISTRIBUTION 
CENTERS, AND MORE DURING TIMES 
OF CRISIS.
STRESSES & SHOCKS ADDRESSED
Inequity
All acute shocks
ACTIONS FOR IMPLEMENTATION
• 
Designing and constructing smart and sustainable redevelopment projects 
• 
Recycling Pittsburgh’s land for its best and highest use 
• 
City’s Senior and Community Centers
Maintain or create attractive and accessible public space throughout the city for all to use and to serve as refuge in times of crisis

[Page 32]
A MODERN COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM 
NOT ONLY IMPROVES RESIDENTS’ ACCESS 
TO INFORMATION AND SERVICES BUT 
ALSO SUPPORTS THE OPERATION OF 
OTHER 
INFRASTRUCTURE 
SYSTEMS, 
INCLUDING TRANSPORTATION, ENERGY, 
AND 
WATER. 
PITTSBURGH’S 
LOCAL 
TECH INDUSTRY POSITIONS THE CITY 
TO 
ESTABLISH 
GOLD 
STANDARD 
TELECOMMUNICATION, DATA SHARING, 
AND CYBER SECURITY PROCESSES.
STRESSES & SHOCKS ADDRESSED
Inequity
Fragmentation
Aging infrastructure
All acute shocks
ACTIONS FOR IMPLEMENTATION
• 
Enhancing city government-to-citizen communication 
• 
Becoming a city of inclusive innovation (Pittsburgh Roadmap for Inclusive Innovation) 
Establish a reliable, modern communications infrastructure that is accessible to all
MASSIVE 
SHIPMENTS, 
INCLUDING 
POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS MATERIALS 
LIKE OIL AND NATURAL GAS, TRAVEL 
THROUGH PITTSBURGH EVERY DAY 
BY ROAD, RAIL, AND BARGE. FOR 
THIS TRANSPORT TO BE A BOON TO 
THE CITY’S ECONOMY RATHER THAN 
A RISK TO ITS INFRASTRUCTURE, 
ENVIRONMENT, 
AND 
RESIDENTS 
REQUIRES 
INFORMATION 
TO 
BE 
COLLECTED 
AND 
REPORTED 
ON 
COMMERCIAL 
TRANSPORT 
AND 
ACTION TO BE TAKEN TO MINIMIZE 
RISK.
STRESSES & SHOCKS ADDRESSED
Aging infrastructure
Hazardous materials incident
ACTIONS FOR IMPLEMENTATION
• 
Developing a smart transportation system
Improve reliability and minimize the risk from commercial and industrial transport throughout the region
100RC NETWORK SHARING HIGHLIGHT: 
Smart commercial transport sharing with Mexico 
City an action related to mobility data sharing through public-private partnerships within the city. As 
Pittsburgh builds out its smart transportation plan and system to include shared data systems for tracking and monitoring transit in the region, there is an opportunity to share lessons learned between the two cities.
FEATURED ACTION: Developing a smart transportation system
LEAD: City of Pittsburgh, Department of Mobility and Infrastructures
STATUS: Accelerate
Pittsburgh’s smart transportation efforts involve developing an open platform and corresponding governance structure to improve the safety, equity, and efficiency of the city’s transportation network and its interaction with the energy and communications networks. By building on existing technology deployments and increasing fixed and mobile sensors over a number of major “Smart Spine” corridors that connect with primary commercial centers and amenities, Pittsburgh will collect, analyze, visualize, and act on information to improve mobility for residents.

[Page 33]
THE CITY’S DYNAMIC TOPOGRAPHY 
OF HILLS, VALLEYS, AND WATERWAYS 
DEMANDS 
THAT 
KEY 
ROADS, 
TUNNELS, 
AND 
BRIDGES 
PERFORM 
RELIABLY IN THE FACE OF AN ACUTE 
SHOCK TO AVOID IMMOBILIZING OR 
ISOLATING THOUSANDS OF RESIDENTS. 
HAZARD 
MITIGATION 
PLANNING 
THAT 
PRIORITIZES 
REGIONAL 
AND 
INTERDEPARTMENTAL COORDINATION 
AND SPECIFIC ACTION STEPS WILL 
FACILITATE THE CITY’S RESPONSE. 
STRESSES & SHOCKS ADDRESSED
Aging infrastructure
All acute shocks
ACTIONS FOR IMPLEMENTATION
• 
Improving disaster preparedness and response (THIRA and Hazard Mitigation 
Plan Update) 
• 
Upgrading and improving the resilience of the power grid (District Energy Pittsburgh) 
• 
Developing a smart transportation system
PLATFORM PARTNER ACTION: Cyber resilience best practice and strategy development
LEAD: City of Pittsburgh, Department of Innovation and Performance
PLATFORM PARTNER: Microsoft
As more of Pittsburgh’s systems become internetbased, the city needs to ensure its cybersecurity. 
Microsoft is working with the Department of 
Innovation and Performance to understand what optimal security requires and increase capacity across city departments for understanding where vulnerabilities lie and how the city should approach the management of cybersecurity as a complex, integrated system. This will allow the city to understand and plan for vulnerabilities to the information technology system as well as expand its capacity for planned and future technologies with which the city will engage. 
Ensure reliable performance of critical infrastructure during disaster

[Page 34]
WATER............................................................
Goal: Improved water quality 
ENERGY....................................................
Goal: : Develop energy portfolio 
RESOURCE EFFICIENCY.................................
Goal: Efficient use of resources
NATURAL INFRASTRUCTURE......................
Goal: Improve natural infrastructure 
RESILIENT DESIGN..........................................
Goal: Minimize public health impacts
PLANET
PIT TSBURGH WILL 
ACHIEVE LONG-TERM 
ENVIRONMENTAL 
SUSTAINABILIT Y 
THROUGH WISE 
STEWARDSHIP, 
IMPROVED RESOURCE 
MANAGEMENT, AND 
A REDUCED CARBON 
FOOTPRINT.

[Page 35]
PLANET
PITTSBURGH IS FAMOUSLY LOCATED AT 
THE CONFLUENCE OF THE ALLEGHENY 
AND MONONGAHELA RIVERS (AND 
THEIR TRIBUTARIES), WHICH CONVERGE 
IN THE HEART OF THE CITY TO FORM THE 
OHIO RIVER. PITTSBURGH IS AWASH IN 
WATER RESOURCES: OVER 2,000 MILES 
OF STREAMS AND 90 MILES OF RIVERS 
FLOW THROUGH ALLEGHENY COUNTY. 
HOWEVER, COMBINED STORMWATER 
AND WASTEWATER SYSTEMS THAT 
DRAIN TO THE RIVERS AND INCREASING 
PRECIPITATION 
PREDICTED 
WITH 
CLIMATE CHANGE POSE CHALLENGES 
FOR THE WATERWAYS’ CONTINUED 
ENVIRONMENTAL 
HEALTH 
AND 
ACCESSIBILITY.
STRESSES & SHOCKS ADDRESSED
Fragmentation
Aging infrastructure
Environmental degradation
Climate change: Flooding
ACTIONS FOR IMPLEMENTATION
• 
Providing access to clean water for drinking and recreation (3 Rivers, 365) 
• 
Recycling Pittsburgh’s land for its best and highest use
100RC NETWORK SHARING HIGHLIGHT: 
Convene resilience leaders in Pittsburgh around the global water crisis
In 2017, Pittsburgh will host a Global Water Crisis 
Conference at Duquesne University and partners from around the world. The Conference will leverage the 100RC Network of CROs and Platform partners around water stress – both a shortage and a surplus. Pittsburgh’s innovative leadership around green infrastructure in response to the U.S. 
EPA’s consent decree on combined sewer overflow will similarly highlight new approaches in the urban water management space for the global network.
Minimize stormwater, wastewater, and sewer issues to reduce flooding and improve the quality and accessibility of our water resources 
PLATFORM PARTNER ACTION: Developing a value proposition for green infrastructure
LEAD: : City of Pittsburgh, PWSA
PLATFORM PARTNER: Impact Infrastructure 
The City-Wide Green First Plan outlines how 
Pittsburgh intends to use innovative, cost-effective, and green infrastructure approaches to manage stormwater. The stormwater management practices outlined in the plan will help the city and the region comply with U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA) combined sewer overflow mandates, improve the quality of local waterways, and address flooding issues. This green-first plan will create shortterm and long-term jobs, improve air quality, and revitalize neighborhoods with green space and other amenities.
In an effort to better understand the multiple cobenefits that these projects can bring to the city, 
PWSA used Impact Infrastructure’s AUTOCASE tool to perform triple bottom line (TBL) analysis to add environmental and social equity factors in addition to financial considerations to the green infrastructure projects proposed in the Plan.
PLATFORM PARTNER ACTION: Negley Run Watershed Resilience Accelerator
LEAD: : City of Pittsburgh, 
PLATFORM PARTNER: ARCADIS
The city region is under consent decree from the U.S. EPA to address the combined sewer overflows into the three rivers, and 
PWSA is taking a green-first approach to a solution. As part of this ongoing effort and because financing green first initiatives can present unique challenges, the City of Pittsburgh engaged Arcadis to host a one-day workshop to explore and advance the implementation of green infrastructure in the Negley Run watershed, which makes up the A-42 sewershed, comprising over 
3,000 acres of dense urban neighborhood development, commercial and light industry, and institutional campus sites.
The goal of the workshop was to understand the current state of practice for interagency collaboration and recent developments in finance and implementation protocols that are relevant for Negley Run. With experts from a select group of community representatives, including PWSA and ALCOSAN as well as national and global experts in resilience and stormwater management, the session focused on global and local best practices, project value assessments, innovative financial structures, current governance and regulations, and possible implementation strategies for green infrastructure. 
The city will use the outputs from the workshop to inform the development of an Implementation Protocol that can be applied to green infrastructure projects for Negley Run and serve as a blueprint for other similar projects in other areas of the city.

[Page 36]
PITTSBURGH RELIES ON A LARGESCALE, INTERCONNECTED ELECTRICITY 
DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM THAT IS FUELED 
BY A VARIETY OF SOURCES, INCLUDING 
COAL, NATURAL GAS, AND NUCLEAR 
ENERGY, WITH A SMALL PROPORTION 
FUELED 
BY 
RENEWABLES. 
NEW 
DEVELOPMENTS 
IN 
THE 
DISTRICT 
ENERGY SPACE AIM TO CREATE A 
MORE DISTRIBUTED ENERGY GRID 
LESS PRONE TO CAPACITY LOSS, 
WHILE LOCAL GENERATION HAS THE 
POTENTIAL TO BENEFIT THE GRID AND 
THE CLIMATE.
STRESSES & SHOCKS ADDRESSED
Aging infrastructure
Environmental degradation
Climate change impacts
ACTIONS FOR IMPLEMENTATION
• 
Increasing local renewable energy production 
• 
Creating a circular economy in Pittsburgh 
• 
Upgrading and improving the resilience of the power grid (District Energy Pittsburgh) 
• 
Establishing future climate goals and strategies (Climate Action Plan and 2030 Goals)
FEATURED SUB-ACTION: MOU with National En­ ergy Technology Lab (NETL)
LEAD: City of Pittsburgh, Department of Mobility and Infrastructure
In 2015 Mayor Peduto signed a Memorandum of 
Understanding with the National Energy Technology 
Laboratory on behalf of the U.S. Department of 
Energy on joint efforts to design 21st Century energy infrastructure for Pittsburgh. The MOU will serve to position Pittsburgh as a demonstrated national and global leader in new technology development, and demonstration and application of strategic models. The outcomes of this MOU will help modernize delivery of utility services through new business models and markets, grow technology research and development opportunities and product manufacturing, reduce environmental impacts, enhance resilience and security through integrated district-based microgrid solutions, address affordability for consumers, and encourage workforce development.
Develop a resilient energy portfolio through diversified sources and local generation
Figure notes: This map depicts the District Energy Pittsburgh sites distributed in key locations throughout the city. Some sites are currently established and oper­ ational while others are in the planning phases. Source: National Energy Technology Lab, 2016
100RC NETWORK SHARING HIGHLIGHT: 
Building a resilient grid with partners across the network
CROs in cities across the 100RC network, from 
Boston, Massachusetts to Berkeley, California to 
Boulder, Colorado and beyond, have been sharing knowledge and collaborating around microgrids. 
Pittsburgh has been a trailblazer in this area, working to build strong relationships across the utilities, major users, and university partners conducting research on distributed energy and microgrids. Additionally, Pittsburgh will be featured as part of Siemens/100RC event series as a thought leader in technology and innovation in microgrids/ distributed energy and resilience. Within the 100RC network, Pittsburgh will be a key part of advancing and elevating the work on microgrids and distributed energy among CROs, and the city itself will be a living lab to see the progress in technology and innovation as this work develops.
Figure 24. District Energy Pittsburgh sites

[Page 37]
AS A PART OF THE CLIMATE ACTION 
PLANNING PROCESS, PARTNERS IN 
PITTSBURGH HAVE ESTABLISHED A 
SET OF GOALS RELATED TO REDUCING 
WATER, ENERGY USE, AND EMISSIONS 
AND MAKING WASTE MANAGEMENT 
MORE 
EFFICIENT. 
A 
RESILIENT 
PITTSBURGH 
WILL 
EXTEND 
THE 
REACH OF THESE GOALS TO PROMOTE 
EFFICIENT RESOURCE USE CITY-WIDE.
STRESSES & SHOCKS ADDRESSED
Environmental degradation
Climate change impacts
ACTIONS FOR IMPLEMENTATION
• 
Establishing future climate goals and strategies (Climate Action Plan and 2030 Goals)
• 
Improving corporate sustainability and green buildings 
• 
Creating a circular economy in Pittsburgh 
• 
Creating green and healthy homes 
FEATURED ACTION: Establishing future climate goals and strategies
LEAD: City of Pittsburgh and partners
STATUS: Accelerate
The Pittsburgh 2030 District is a collaborative community of high-performance buildings in Downtown Pittsburgh working towards 50 percent reductions in energy use, water use, and transportation emissions by 2030, with new construction reaching carbon neutrality by that time. This supports the city’s Climate Initiative and 
Climate Action Plan, which seeks collaboration across sectors to analyze and implement strategies, policies, and projects to reduce greenhouse gas emissions within city limits and mitigate Pittsburgh’s contribution to global climate change.
Make efficient use of water, energy, and waste management resources citywide
PLATFORM PARTNER ACTION: Thriving Earth 
Exchange Initiative
LEAD: City of Pittsburgh
PLATFORM PARTNER: American Geophysical 
Union (AGU) Thriving Earth Exchange 
The City is in the process of completing the third iteration of its Greenhouse Gas Inventory. Through the Thriving Earth Exchange, AGU provided technical support to help the city validate the inventory and participate in the Climate Action 
Planning process. AGU’s support will help Pittsburgh develop a standardized methodology to benchmark greenhouse gases year on year, which will enable the city to better track their progress in meeting the carbon mitigation goals set forth in the Climate 
Action Plan.
PITTSBURGH IS ENDOWED WITH A 
WEALTH OF NATURAL RESOURCES, 
FROM ITS FORESTS TO ITS RIVERS TO 
ITS OVER 15,000 ACRES OF PARKS IN THE 
CITY AND SURROUNDING ALLEGHENY 
COUNTY. NON-PROFITS AND CITY 
AND COUNTY PARKS ORGANIZATIONS 
HAVE EXPANDED AND IMPROVED THE 
CITY’S NATURAL INFRASTRUCTURE IN 
RECENT YEARS. INVASIVE SPECIES AND 
INCREASED DEVELOPMENT THREATEN 
THE 
HEALTH 
AND 
SURVIVAL 
OF 
PITTSBURGH’S NATURAL ASSETS, SO 
STRATEGIC CONSERVATION EFFORTS 
ARE WARRANTED.
STRESSES & SHOCKS ADDRESSED
Inequity
Aging infrastructure
Environmental degradation
Climate change: Flooding, extreme heat
Invasive species
ACTIONS FOR IMPLEMENTATION
• 
Conserving, investing in, and connecting to nature (Biophilic city)
• 
Recycling Pittsburgh’s land for its best and highest use 
• 
Providing access to clean water for drinking and recreation (3 Rivers, 365)
FEATURED ACTION: Biophilic City
LEAD: City of Pittsburgh; Phipps Conservatory
STATUS: Accelerate
Phipps Conservatory coordinates monthly Biophilia group meetups and, in partnership with the 
Biophilic Cities movement, worked with the City of Pittsburgh to become designated as a Biophilic city in 2016. Biophilic cities are built around nature, giving residents a recognition and affinity for local flora and fauna, providing education, and investing in infrastructure that protects nature and brings residents closer to it.
Maintain and improve natural infrastructure assets
100RC NETWORK SHARING HIGHLIGHT:
Ecosystem planning sharing with Boulder
Boulder’s strategy includes actions related to bring together disparate efforts to develop an integrated urban ecosystem management plan. With this plan, 
Boulder will support its complex local ecosystem and prepare for the systemic stresses and changes anticipated with climate change impacts. As 
Pittsburgh explores ways to build upon, protect, and better integrate efforts around its natural infrastructure, lessons learned from Boulder related to systems-level actions will be useful.

[Page 38]
PITTSBURGH’S POOR AIR, SOIL, AND 
WATER QUALITY BEAR THE MARKS 
OF THE CITY’S INDUSTRIAL LEGACY. A 
WORK TO RE-MEDIATE THE DAMAGES 
OF THE PAST BUT ALSO DESIGN 
INFRASTRUCTURE 
AND 
PRODUCE 
ENERGY IN WAYS THAT MINIMIZE 
FUTURE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS.
STRESSES & SHOCKS ADDRESSED
Aging infrastructure
Environmental degradation
Climate change impacts
ACTIONS FOR IMPLEMENTATION
• 
Creating a circular economy in Pittsburgh 
• 
Enabling multi-modal transportation 
• 
Upgrading and improving the resilience of the power grid (District Energy Pittsburgh) 
• 
Improving outdoor and indoor air quality 
• 
Creating green and healthy homes 
• 
Developing a smart transportation system 
Design infrastructure to minimize environmental and public health impacts
PLATFORM PARTNER SUB- ACTION: 100% waste diversion roadmap 
LEAD: City of Pittsburgh, Division of Sustainability and Resilience
PLATFORM PARTNER: R2
In December 2015, Mayor Peduto released the city’s 
2030 goals, which includes a goal to divert 100 percent of the city’s waste from landfill. R20 worked with the city to conduct a waste survey, site visits, and interviews with key stakeholders to assess the state of the city’s current waste management practices and has developed a roadmap of activities the city can take to achieve its zero waste goals. 
The roadmap includes opportunities that can be leveraged by understanding barriers to zero waste, taking advantage of technologies and best practices that can be brought to the city, as well as policy and legislation recommendations that will create an enabling environment to achieve 100 percent diversion from landfill by 2030.

[Page 39]
ENTREPRENEURSHIP.................................
Goal: Promote innovation 
CIVIC ENGAGEMENT...............................
Goal: : Educate & empower residents
COLLABORATION.........................................
Goal: Support collaboration
MEASUREMENT..........................................
Goal: Integrate data
PERFORMANCE
PIT TSBURGH 
WILL WORK 
COLLABORATIVELY 
WITH GOVERNMENT 
AND NONGOVERNMENTAL 
PARTNERS IN 
THE REGION FOR 
PLANNING AND 
DECISION-MAKING.

[Page 40]
AN EMERGING TECHNOLOGY AND 
ROBOTICS 
SECTOR 
IN 
THE 
CITY 
BUILDS ON RESEARCH CONDUCTED 
AT CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY, 
THE 
UNIVERSITY 
OF 
PITTSBURGH, 
AND 
OTHER 
LOCAL 
RESEARCH 
INSTITUTIONS. MOREOVER, THE CITY 
IS INCREASINGLY RECOGNIZED FOR 
THE CULTURAL AMENITIES AFFORDED 
BY THE ARTS, ENTERTAINMENT, AND 
FOOD SERVICE SECTORS. TO ENHANCE 
ITS ECONOMIC PROFILE AND BUILD 
ON ITS TRADITION OF INNOVATION, 
PITTSBURGH SHOULD CONTINUE TO 
SUPPORT PIONEERING TECHNOLOGY (AND 
NON-TECHNOLOGICAL 
INNOVATION) AND NEW BUSINESS 
DEVELOPMENT.
STRESSES & SHOCKS ADDRESSED
Inequity: Education, employment, income
Aging population and workforce
Economic collapse
ACTIONS FOR IMPLEMENTATION
• 
Stimulating small business development 
• 
Becoming a city of inclusive innovation (Pittsburgh Roadmap for Inclusive Innovation) 
• 
Developing and retraining Pittsburgh’s workforce 
FEATURED ACTION: Roadmap for Inclusive 
Innovation
LEAD: City of Pittsburgh, Department of Innova­ tion and Performance
STAGE: Accelerate
The Roadmap for Inclusive Innovation lays out a number of initiatives the City of Pittsburgh should undertake in the coming months and years to remain a hub of innovation for social groups, companies, and people. Specific action steps have been established to address the digital divide, empower city-to-citizen engagement, provide open data, improve internal city operations and capacity, advance the clean tech sector, and promote the local business environment.
Promote innovation and incubation of new technologies and businesses
PITTSBURGHERS TAKE GREAT PRIDE IN 
THEIR CITY AS A “BIG SMALL TOWN,” 
WHERE RESIDENTS FEEL CONNECTED 
TO 
THEIR 
NEIGHBORHOODS 
AND 
HAVE A SAY IN CIVIC DECISIONMAKING. AS PITTSBURGH GROWS, 
THE CITY SHOULD SEEK TO MAXIMIZE 
COMMUNITY 
PARTICIPATION 
IN 
PLANNING PROCESSES AND PROVIDE A 
SEAT AT THE TABLE FOR ALL RESIDENTS.
STRESSES & SHOCKS ADDRESSED
Inequity
Fragmentation
ACTIONS FOR IMPLEMENTATION
• 
Enhancing civic education and engagement 
• 
Providing opportunities for community service and volunteering 
• 
Encouraging neighborhood-based grassroots efforts 
• 
Enhancing city government-to-citizen communication
• 
Improving community-police relations
• 
Confronting and overcoming structural barriers and racism
• 
Becoming a city of inclusive innovation (Pittsburgh Roadmap for Inclusive Innovation) 
• 
Conserving, investing in, and connecting to nature (Biophilic city)
100RC NETWORK SHARING HIGHLIGHT: 
Civic engagement sharing with Semarang enhancing public engagement and trust in government. 
A strategic pillar of their strategy, “Transparent Public 
Information and Governance,” focuses on improving an existing participatory planning process already in place in Semarang to better engage citizens to solicit more meaningful input in development and budgeting decisions. Lessons learned from Semarang’s resilience actions will be useful as Pittsburgh experiments with new ways of engaging residents in decision-making.
Educate, engage, and empower residents to take part in civic decision-making
FEATURED ORGANIZATION: 
Program for Deliberative Democracy
The Program for Deliberative Democracy strives to improve local and regional decision-making through informed citizen deliberations. It has utilized Deliberative Citizen Forums and other forms of community conversations to cover such topics as capital budgeting, climate change, good governance, resilience, and the selection of a new 
Pittsburgh Police Chief. Forums are open to the public and typically include facilitated small group discussions, the opportunity to ask questions of an expert panel, and a survey.
PERFORMANCE
Inclusive Innovation Week sets out to celebrate, connect and promote organizations, people and partners who practice inclusive innovation. The week seeks to provide a city-wide opportunity to participate in and engage with innovation in the City of Pittsburgh.
SUBMIT YOUR EVENT BY 3.1.2017 innovationroadmap.pittsburghpa.gov 
Innovation
Inclusive for
PITTSBURGH ROADMAP

[Page 41]
WHILE 
PITTSBURGHERS 
PRIDE 
THEMSELVES ON COLLEGIALITY AND 
WORKING WELL WITH ONE ANOTHER, 
FRAGMENTATION 
AMONG 
AND 
WITHIN GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS 
AND WITH NON-PROFITS RESULTS IN 
DUPLICATION OF EFFORTS AND LOST 
POTENTIAL FOR IMPACT. THERE ARE 
A NUMBER OF SHARED REGIONAL 
ISSUES THAT INVITE COLLABORATION, 
FROM WATER AND AIR QUALITY ISSUES 
TO TRANSPORTATION TO TACKLING 
THE OPIOID EPIDEMIC. SUCCESSFUL 
COLLABORATION NOT ONLY REQUIRES 
DEDICATION TO A SHARED MISSION 
BUT ALSO CAPACITY AND RESOURCES 
TO CONVENE PARTNERS. 
STRESSES & SHOCKS ADDRESSED
Fragmentation
Economic collapse
ACTIONS FOR IMPLEMENTATION
• 
Exploring ways of institutionalizing the resilience lens in city processes
• 
Measuring Pittsburgh’s resilience and wellbeing (Pittsburgh Survey, 2.0) 
• 
Sharing and integrating data
• 
Enhancing city-to-city collaboration around shared issues 
• 
Enhancing Pittsburgh’s fiscal capacity in partnership with non-profits (Payment in Lieu of Taxes (PILOT))
• 
Exploring the creation of the Resilience 
Institute of Pittsburgh
• 
Integrating data systems to serve PPS students more effectively (Student Connections) 
• 
Integrating social services into Pittsburgh 
Public Schools (PPS Community Schools)
• 
Improving disaster preparedness and response (THIRA and Hazard Mitigation Plan Update) 
FEATURED EVENT: CONNECT Utilities Summit
LEAD: Congress of Neighboring Communities (CONNECT)
CONNECT brings together the City of Pittsburgh and surrounding municipalities to identify common public policy challenges and advocate for collective change on behalf of Allegheny County’s urban core. 
The annual Utilities Summit includes the sharing of upcoming paving and construction plans with the goal of identifying opportunities for collaboration and an effort to procure a common data platform that the Utilities and municipalities can use to coordinate plans. 
Align and dedicate funding and resources to support collaboration around shared goals 
GOVERNMENT TRANSPARENCY AND OPEN DATA 
ARE HAVING THEIR DAY IN THE SUN, ESPECIALLY 
IN THE PITTSBURGH, WHERE THE CITY OF 
PITTSBURGH ANALYTICS TEAM MANAGES THE 
CITY’S OPEN DATA, BUILDS NEW PERFORMANCE 
MANAGEMENT TOOLS, AND GENERALLY AIMS 
TO MAKE DATA MORE ACCESSIBLE AND USABLE 
FOR GOVERNMENT AND NONGOVERNMENTAL 
PARTNERS. HOWEVER, PITTSBURGH CURRENTLY 
DOES NOT HAVE A SHARED FRAMEWORK FOR 
MEASUREMENT AND DECISION-MAKING ON 
WHICH TO LAYER THESE DATA NOR A CURRENT 
OR COMPREHENSIVE PICTURE OF RESIDENT 
WELLBEING. BUILDING UPON THE WORK OF 
THE 
WESTERN 
PENNSYLVANIA 
REGIONAL 
DATA CENTER, EXPANDING THE NUMBER OF 
ORGANIZATIONS CONTRIBUTING DATA TO THE 
DATA CENTER, AND COLLECTING NEW DATA TO 
FILL GAPS IN UNDERSTANDING WILL ENABLE 
MORE EFFECTIVE COLLABORATION. 
STRESSES & SHOCKS ADDRESSED
Fragmentation
ACTIONS FOR IMPLEMENTATION
• 
Sharing and integrating data
• 
Measuring Pittsburgh’s resilience and wellbeing (Pittsburgh Survey, 2.0) 
• 
Integrating data systems to serve PPS students more effectively (Student Connections)
• 
Exploring the creation of the Resilience 
Institute of Pittsburgh
• 
Developing a smart transportation system
Integrate data and build analytic capabilities across organizations and government entities to 
FEATURED ACTION: Shared/integrated data efforts
LEAD: City of Pittsburgh, Department of Innovation and Performance; Western Pennsylvania Regional 
Data Center (WPRDC); and partners
Shared/integrated data efforts
Data sharing initiatives are ongoing in the city, where the Western Pennsylvania Regional Data Center, the city’s open data portal, acts as a single data hub to support community initiatives by making public information easier to find and use. Data is increasingly being shared to support action in a range of sectors, including health, transportation, and public safety, both within the City of Pittsburgh, for example, through the use of Accela to coordinate efforts across city departments (see breakout box on pg. 82) , and by public sector agencies, academic institutions, and non-profit organizations. Data sharing provides a foundation on which to address shared issues and reduce the stovepiping that often inhibits collaboration, while empowering residents with information about their community.
FEATURED ACTION: DOT Smart Cities Challenge
LEAD: City of Pittsburgh and partners
The SmartPGH Consortium believes in using their collective resources to ensure that SmartPGH results in a system of transportation networks that are more efficient, effective, and equitable for all. 
They intend to become the global model for urban transportation planning, replicating their effective approach within this region and others across the 
United States. They will provide leadership, input, oversight, and accountability for the SmartPGH 
Vision as established in the city’s application to the Department of Transportation’s Smart City 
Competition.
FEATURED ACTION: Pittsburgh Survey, 2.0
Corporation, and partners
Pittsburgh Survey, 2.0 will serve as the measurement framework for this strategy and plan and will provide a comprehensive picture of what life is like for Pittsburgh residents today. It will incorporate data integration from the vast array of ongoing activities in the city as well new data collection from Pittsburgh residents. The Survey will help the city to benchmark and track progress toward the objectives laid out in this strategy, serve as a tool to support decision-making by aligning key priorities and initiatives in the city, and help to integrate and track those priority initiatives within a framework of action.
PERFORMANCE

[Page 42]
IMPLEMENTATION

[Page 43]
3. Establish a measurement framework: Pittsburgh 
Survey 2.0
To document progress and monitor the effectiveness of resilience-building initiatives and actions, the Resilient 
Pittsburgh team will begin to establish a measurement framework in the first year. Currently, existing information about city needs is diffused and fragmented across the city both in government and nongovernmental activities. 
One important ongoing measurement effort is the p4 
Performance Measures Project, which aims to “provide a comprehensive evaluation tool for the consistent assessment of real estate development projects in the city of Pittsburgh to advance sustainable and equitable development practices.”63 The Measures are currently in use by the URA as a new method for evaluating the benefit and impact of a site development project receiving public investment. 
Building upon the p4 Performance Measures and other data collection and measurement efforts underway, Pittsburgh is poised to develop a holistic and coordinated way to capture progress towards city resilience and wellbeing using a more integrated survey method. 
A “Pittsburgh Survey, 2.0”, which is inspired by a groundbreaking survey of city residents administered over a century ago, will address some of the challenges identified in this implementation section.64 It will serve as a comprehensive information system to align and support Pittsburgh’s initiatives (at the public level, while also available to private entities, non-profits, and foundations) from now through 
2030. 
The Survey will become the central monitoring and evaluation mechanism for the implementation of this and administrative data that supports resilience and identify places where new or primary data collection is needed. The 
Survey will include core resilience and related wellbeing objectives, organize relevant actions like those in the strategy, and offer a foundation of data to link the effectiveness and efficiency of current investments, initiatives, policies, and programs to support resilience and wellbeing in Pittsburgh.
4. Integrate resilience into civic engagement and public events
To bring resilience into prominence in the larger city resilience-building into civic engagement initiatives and existing events. In year one, Love Your Resilient Block grants will fund community-driven projects that address the city’s resilience challenges at the neighborhood level. 
Resilience Fairs and a series of citywide events will leverage partner organizations’ ongoing resilience-building initiatives. with regional audiences and engage residences, businesses, and institutions in learning about and celebrating resilience in all facets of life in Pittsburgh. 
Overall, near-term implementation will focus heavily on institutionalization and reducing fragmentation in both government and nongovernmental areas, fostering a regional atmosphere of collaborative problem solving and resource coordination. Year one of implementation is about bringing people, neighborhoods, and organizations together as we prepare to address the future uncertain challenges that all Pittsburghers will face from climate change, globalization, and urbanization.
IMPLEMENTING THE STRATEGY
The strategy offers a single, unifying way to strengthen the resilience and wellbeing of all Pittsburgh residents. For the promise of the strategy to be realized, the city plans to support a series of implementation steps through the next year to ensure coordinated and effective rollout and adoption by a range of sectors and stakeholders. into core government activities, as evidenced by the the Division of Sustainability and Resilience within the 
Department of City Planning, the creation of action leadership teams on themes from the strategy (e.g., economic development and workforce, cohesive monitoring and evaluation), and clear resource allocations to support priority strategy objectives. These near-term steps will ensure that the strategy produces clear outcomes but also catalyzes continued dialogue and immediate action. Further, in order to facilitate implementation, the city will need to effectively organize current city activities to realize their respective benefits for resilience. Finally, in the long term, organizational alignment and smart resource allocation will be important for strategy maintenance and sustainability. 
NEAR-TERM IMPLEMENTATION STEPS multifaceted approach, both to ensure the work is representative of diverse stakeholders and to realize outline highlights from the strategy document, serve as the platform for measuring progress over time, and will host a repository of ongoing events and initiatives related to the strategy. A video will provide additional context for the vision positive change in their neighborhoods and households. 
Finally, an investment prospectus will draw from the actions featured in the strategy to address resilience challenges, and motivate funding for resource coordination and reduction of fragmentation among philanthropic initiatives. 
The Division of Sustainability and Resilience will serve as the lead office for strategy implementation. The Office will also focus on four pathways to implement the strategy in year one: 
1. Convene action leadership groups
2. Establish a governance and institutionalization framework
3. Establish a measurement framework
4. Integrate resilience-building into civic engagement and public events. 
1. Convene action leadership groups cannot execute this strategy alone. It was developed collaboratively as a citywide collaborative effort, and also addresses a range of regional resilience challenges. Tackling fragmentation within the city’s systems and between the city and external organizations is central in the first year of strategy implementation. 
A series of events and round-tables will bring together diverse organizations working on systemic issues – for example, water quality, education, energy, and public health – to establish leadership and coordination in solving some of the city’s most pressing challenges. Improved coordination will result in resource efficiency, better communication and long lasting partnerships, as well as agility across sectors for a deeper analysis of what is truly driving challenges to city resilience. Establishing leadership within topical areas is also intended to motivate both city departments and external organizations to lead implementation of the resilience strategy over the long-term. 
2. Establish a governance and institutionalization framework
Institutionalization of the resilience focus within city government will ensure that the strategy remains relevant regardless of changes in personnel or shifts in political leadership. The location of the Division of Sustainability and Resilience within the Department of City Planning will support long-term integration of resilience by establishing formal resilience commissions and committees in the coming year. a governance framework group, which will provide recommendations to the Mayor for establishing commissions and implementation structures. 
NEIGHBORHOOD RESILIENCE IN ACTION: 
One Northside
Thousands of Northsiders are participating in a community-driven initiative to improve the quality of life in all 18 neighborhoods of the 
Northside. Residents and community members have been working together to define what is working in the community and what is needed, and to develop shared strategies that will make a difference now and for years to come. Following an extensive resident-driven process, 
One 
Northside’s implementation phase is focused on the quality of Education, 
Place and Employment. The One Northside 
Consensus Plan is a comprehensive approach to community revitalization that builds on existing assets and supports residents in creating the positive outcomes that they want in their lives and communities. Select community projects focus on school readiness, out-of-school activities for teens, repurposing vacant land and properties, and improving parks and recreation opportunities.

[Page 44]
LONG-TERM IMPLEMENTATION FACTORS implementation plan to support uptake, integration, and long-term sustainability. There are several ways in which the strategy could be propelled to advance its vision and objectives but also areas that could impede implementation, particularly after the initial activities are complete. We briefly describe each of the factors that will support implementation over the next several years and then discuss measures to monitor long-term progress towards strategy goals and objectives. These measures will be included in the Pittsburgh 
Survey, described earlier.
Coordination among government and nongovernmental sectors
Coordination among government and nongovernmental sectors is central, particularly because the strategy relies on integrated actions by many sectors and stakeholders working together. As such, each action group will require lead and supporting actors who will contribute to its achievement. 
Further, coordination will be required to determine how the range of government agencies, nonprofits, businesses, and other organizations will integrate the strategy and its objectives into their core missions and organizational plans. 
In the context of coordination, it is also important to consider the governance structures that will appropriately “scaffold” the strategy, that is, help build robust and usable plans for decision-making, prioritization of actions, and resource allocation. This also includes careful planning around leadership, including how the city provides leadership to the strategy and how community leaders can serve as ambassadors for the strategy’s goals and objectives over time. 
Resource allocation and a cohesive investment framework
Clearly, dedicated resources (both fiscal and non-fiscal) are is introduced. However, implementation is not simply about raising funds or increasing funding levels. Rather, it is important to understand how resources already allocated in existing budgets (government and non-government) support the strategy’s objectives. For example, Pittsburgh’s capital budget can be reviewed in light of resilience priorities (see example in the callout box).
Resilience-focused analysis and action with attention to resilience co-benefits: By collecting and utilizing additional quantitative and qualitative data on socioeconomics and community resources and assets (for example, household surveys), or incorporating information on externalities (for example, greenhouse gas footprint or intensity), a more sophisticated approach to investment can be made using the “resilience lens.” The portfolio of investments selected by considering a broader set of metrics and assessing the corresponding quantitative and qualitative data would likely not be the same as those selected with economic cost-benefit analysis alone. In this case, metrics would need to be expanded to a more holistic and complete list that captures all facets of city resilience, and co-benefits would be explicitly considered.
For example, if the city wanted to prioritize the improvement and functionality of emergency response services, it might choose to focus on these assets first. In this case, the “Medic 10” facility—with the highest total energy bill and dramatically higher per-square-foot energy intensity among emergency medical services facilities, which the city owns and maintains5—might be the clear choice. Although this facility is not the most obvious target across the full set of city assets from a total energy cost perspective, it has high per-square-foot energy intensity and provides the potential co-benefit of enhancing emergency response services that operate out of this facility. 
Sources
City of Pittsburgh, 2015 Operating Budget; City of Pittsburgh, 2016 Operating Budget; City of Pittsburgh, 2017 Operating Budget;1 Western Pennsylvania Regional Data Center, “Municipal Building 
Energy Use, 2009-2014;”2 Western Pennsylvania Regional Data Center, “Pittsburgh City Facilities”3
Table 1. Example energy efficiency goals, metrics, and assets for investment
Example Goal
Potential 
Metric(s)
Candidate Assets for Capital Invest­ ments2
Largest energy bill reduction with fewest number of projects
• 
Highest total energy bills for single assets
City County Building; General Services 
Eazor Warehouse; Police Headquarters3
Largest energy bill reduction with lowest total expenditure
• 
Largest per-square-foot energy bills 
• 
Age of building and structural consid­ erations
Public Works Traffic Division Storage 
Building, Morningside Fieldhouse, 
McKinley Park Storage Shed4
CASE STUDY FOR CITY OF PITTSBURGH CAPITAL INVESTMENT DECISIONS: ASSESSING UTILITY 
BILLS IN THE CONTEXT OF RESILIENCE
The City of Pittsburgh owns and maintains 139 municipal buildings and dozens of additional assets for which it must pay monthly operating expenses. Utility bills represent one significant recurring expense: in 2016, the city expects to pay around $4.2 million, $1.1 million, and $370,000, respectively, for electricity, natural gas, and water. To maintain its assets, the city makes capital investments, which may lead to reductions in monthly utility bills. To assess the relative impact of these capital investments on Pittsburgh’s resilience, the city could conduct several different analyses, each leading to different answers regarding the “best” actions/decisions. It is useful to articulate how resilience outcome metrics can be mapped to the allocation of funding for capital investments across the city’s many building and structural assets. Some of the budgeting approaches could focus on strengthening city resilience through general efficiency, while others are about identifying resilience co-benefits from single investment choices or budget re-allocation. We use the utility budget to illustrate each approach. 
Cost-benefit analysis and action to build basic resilience and energy efficiency: Using readily available data, city assets could be ranked in terms of attributes such as the absolute size of the utility bills and the building age, size, structure type, or other physical characteristics. Based on this type of information, capital funding could be allocated to building projects that, for example, would lead to the greatest net reduction in monthly utility bills (such as the biggest economic “bang for the buck”) or the maximum economic benefit per unit cost of capital improvement investment. Table 1 provides examples of goals, associated metrics, and assets that would first be considered with this focus.

[Page 45]
There are many instances within this strategy that suggest new ways to align resources with programs and policies already in place. The action taxonomy offered below (Figure 
25)—initiate, coordinate, amplify, and accelerate—is a useful way to categorize resource decisions. Some actions will require concentrated resources to amplify or accelerate progress. Other actions will benefit from coordination of resources from across government and nongovernmental sectors. investment framework or prospectus for private and public sector entities in Pittsburgh. The main goals of the strategy (for example, People) along with the detailed objectives inform areas in which sector-specific investments may be needed and co-benefits from investments could be realized. Many of the maps indicating where assets are low and vulnerabilities are high also suggest places for targeted investment. 
Community awareness and ongoing education
Another factor that will facilitate effective implementation is continued dialogue about why resilience matters, how a resilience lens for existing and new programs and investments moves beyond traditional silos, and what benefits or co-benefits strategy implementation could achieve. Without the consistent engagement of Pittsburgh stakeholders, it will be difficult to advance interest and active participation in the strategy and realization of its vision. 
This includes ongoing efforts and the post-strategy launch to keep community members connected to the strategy. 
This education campaign may require new engagement strategies, use of diverse media approaches, and ongoing analysis of how the strategy is being received, adopted, and integrated by different constituencies. 
Targeted partner building
While coordination, resource allocation, and education are critical for implementation, these are not sufficient in themselves to support implementation of a strategy that is holistic and integrated into whole-of-city planning and policy development. Targeted actions and investments that facilitate new and, in some cases, unusual collaborations, are essential for breaking down silos that may impede integrated efforts to achieve some of the strategy objectives. 
Successful implementation will also depend on lessons learned, information sharing, and peer city support through city-to-city networks. Existing networks like 100RC, the 
National League of Cities, Urban Sustainability Directors 
Network, Sister Cities, the Mayors’ Compact on Climate 
Change, and the Pennsylvania League of Cities and 
Municipalities are important exemplars that Pittsburgh is already actively engaged with.
MEASURING PROGRESS
As described above, ongoing measurement and regular analysis and use of the data collected will be central to successful implementation. The resilience objectives and actions provide a way to measure strategy progress. There are three approaches for strategy evaluation. First, each of the objectives can be linked to metrics that assess both process and outcomes. This will help Pittsburgh determine whether the city is becoming more resilient in key areas. (Table 2).
Second, the strategy will also need to track how particular actions are implemented against community readiness and the appropriateness or each action for adoption or uptake. 
The city will also want to track how well that process is taking shape. For example, how well are new actions initiated; is there better coordination among existing actions; are current actions being amplified to meet new populations; and are particular actions being accelerated to speed up adoption? (Table 3)
Finally, while tables like the one above are useful for tracking progress from specific goal to objective to resilience outcomes, they do not include critical monitoring of whether the strategy as a whole continues to meet its larger vision of making Pittsburgh more resilient to a range of shocks and stresses. As such, it will be important use a more overarching evaluation to determine how the systems and sectors that support resilience are also progressing institutionally. For example, key questions may include:
• Do all sectors across Pittsburgh and regionally integrate resilience as a core principle of mission, vision, and operating efforts? How is that attention to resilience represented?
• Is there more effective and efficient coordination among agencies and organizations to pursue resilience goals and objectives?
• Is there better communication and partnership among agencies and organizations? 
Overall, this chapter provides a clear set of near-term steps to support successful strategy implementation and outlines critical organizational and community factors that are required to build Pittsburgh’s resilience. Integration and alignment of metrics and evaluation activities across city departments and organizations will be central to achieving the primary goal and objectives 
Table 2. Example of linking strategy goals, objectives, and evaluation measures
GOAL
OBJECTIVE
MEASURES
Process
Outcome-based
People
Housing: Provide safe, affordable, and sustainable housing in new development or redevelopment
Provision of services that support rehabilitation of housing stock and prevent blight
Uptake of affordable housing across 
Pittsburgh neighborhoods
Linkage of housing security with employment, income, and/or related outcomes
Place
Green space: Ensure that each community in Pittsburgh is connected to nature
Allocation of resources to support maintenance of green space
Use of green space by Pittsburgh res­ idents, regardless of income or other background characteristics
Benefits of green space use on resi­ dent health
Table 3. Examples of process measures within this action taxonomy
ACTION TAXONOMY
EXAMPLE PROCESS MEASURES
Initiation of new action
• 
Clear articulation of the motivation and purpose of the action, including linkage with strategy goal and objective
• 
Leadership for the new action with plan for roll-out
Coordination among existing actions
• 
Linkage among organizations required to implement action
• 
Communication quality and ease among organizations responsible for action
Amplification of current actions
• 
Uptake of action in new neighborhood(s), among new population(s)
• 
Resource allocation matches broadening or diffusion of action
Acceleration of actions
• 
Relative speed of action implementation, use, and/or uptake
• 
Change in behaviors or other outcomes related to exposure to the action

[Page 46]
CONCLUSION the successes in recent decades and a wealth of community assets while directly confronting the complex challenges that the city continues to face. The resilience strategy is greater than a single initiative or plan. It is a guide for city decisions and expectations, and is built to be sustainable over time. The strategy will help 
Pittsburgh realize the central purpose of a thriving city in the 21st century: to create conditions in which every resident can flourish in the face of challenges and a community that can effectively respond and recover in any circumstance. 
The strategy comes at a critical period in Pittsburgh’s history, in which choices made today about globalization, urbanization, climate change, equity, and economic progress will set a trajectory for generations to come. It acknowledges the complex interconnections among city challenges, with social, economic, and environmental effects resulting from every major decision. As such, siloed and single-sector actions are not sufficient, and city government cannot solve problems alone. Instead, a vast array of unique contributions from government and nongovernmental organizations needs to be harnessed to build on 
Pittsburgh’s strengths, minimize its vulnerabilities, and help the city more effectively and cooperatively towards resilience goals. 
The strategy makes organization and governance central to its successful implementation, evidenced by resilience actions like the Pittsburgh Survey 2.0 and other initiatives to align actions and measurement. It recognizes that the sustainability of the strategy over the long term will be rooted in a foundation of near-term achievements. As this strategy is implemented and cross-sector coordination improves, Pittsburgh will have more tools and capabilities to support its residents in addressing a range of shocks and stresses and in ensuring that basic needs are met. These efforts will not stop at the city borders, but are intended to provide benefits for residents across the metropolitan region. In opportunity for themselves and their families. Successful implementation of the strategy means that Pittsburgh as a community can fully realize its aims to be inclusive, celebrate diversity, and promote innovation and sustainable development.

[Page 47]
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS hundreds of Pittsburghers who offered their input to the strategy through the Deliberative Democracy forums and the Resilience Fair, the many city staff members who participated in working groups and who will play a vital role in implementing this strategy, and the non-profit, philanthropic, and governmental partners who contributed to the Steering Committee, focus groups, and working groups throughout the strategy development process.
We would like to acknowledge 100 Resilient Cities – 
Pioneered by the Rockefeller Foundation for the financial support of the strategy process, guidance in developing the strategy, and access to the resources available through the 
100RC network. Thanks especially to Katya Sienkiewicz for her strategic guidance and support. 
Thank you to the RAND Corporation for supporting the development of this document.
Special thanks to our stakeholder groups:
Basic Needs Working Group
Opportunity Working Group
Infrastructure Working Group
Land Use Working Group
Systems Performance Working Group
Steering Committee participants:
Allegheny County
Allegheny County Health Department
Allegheny County Sanitary Authority (ALCOSAN)
Birchmere Ventures
Blackberry Meadows Farm
BNY Mellon
Carnegie Mellon University
Chatham University
City of Pittsburgh, Bureau of Neighborhood Empowerment
City of Pittsburgh, Department of City Planning
City of Pittsburgh, Department of Emergency Management and Homeland Security
City of Pittsburgh, Department of Innovation and
Performance
Congress of Neighboring Communities (CONNECT)
Department of Homeland Security
Energy Innovation Center
Greater Pittsburgh Nonprofit Partnership
Green Building Alliance gtech
Heinz Endowments
Hill House 
Homewood Children’s Village
The Islamic Center of Pittsburgh
Intermedix
Land Based Systems
Manchester Bidwell Corporation
Mosites Development
PA Economy League of Greater Pittsburgh
Passive House
PennDOT
Pennsylvania Interfaith Impact Network
Pittsburgh Community Reinvestment Group
Pittsburgh Equity Partners
The Pittsburgh Foundation 
Pittsburgh Promise
Pittsburgh Public Schools
Pittsburgh Water and Sewer Authority
Port Authority of Allegheny County
Richard King Mellon Foundation
SOTA Construction ???
Southwest Pennsylvania Commission
Sustainable Pittsburgh
Thar Energy
Tree Pittsburgh
University of Pittsburgh, Center for Energy
University of Pittsburgh, Department of Immunology and 
Cancer
UPMC
Urban Redevelopment Authority
US Army Corps of Engineers
Vibrant Pittsburgh
World Affairs Council

[Page 48]
REFERENCES
1. City of Pittsburgh. City Budget Archive. 2017. (Accessed January 9, 2017, at http://pittsburghpa.gov/information/budget.)
2. Municipal Building Energy Usage. 2017. (Accessed January 9, 2017, at https://data.wprdc.org/dataset/municipal-build­ ing-energy-usage.)
3. Pittsburgh City Facilities. 2017. (Accessed January 9, 2017, at https://data.wprdc.org/dataset/pittsburgh-city-facilities.) er-green-building/.)
5. Gordineier J. Pittsburgh's Youth-Driven Food Boom. New York Times 2016 March 15.
6. U.S. Census Bureau. State & County QuickFacts: Pittsburgh (city), Pennsylvania. 2013.
7. Bureau USC. State & County QuickFacts: Allegheny County, Pennsylvania. 2017.
8. Cycle 10 forecast of population, households, and employment by county, 2010-2040. 2015. (Accessed January 13, 2016, at 
9. Logan JR, Stults BJ. The Persistence of Segregation in the Metropolis: New Findings from the 2010 Census. 2011.
10. DeVita C, Farrell M. Poverty and Income Insecurity in the Pittsburgh Metropolitan Area: Urban Institute; 2014.
11. U.S. Census Bureau. American Community Survey, 2007-2011. Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. 2011.
12. The state of aging in Allegheny County: Univerisity of Pittsburgh; 2014.
13. Sheehan A. Pittsburgh Attracting More College Graduates. KDKA: CBS Pittsburgh. Pittsburgh, PA2014.
coopercenter.org/demographics/Racial-Dot-Map.)
15. Allegheny County Stormwater Management Plan Phase 1 Report. 2014. (Accessed July 15, 2016, at https://docs.google.
com/viewer?a=v&pid=sites&srcid=YWxsZWdoZW55Y291bnR5c3dtcC5jb218YWxsZWdoZW55LWNvdW50eS1zd21wfG­ d4OmRlNDQ0YjgwMWNlZGMwYg.)
16. Earth Explorer. 2000. (Accessed Janauary 9, 2017, at https://earthexplorer.usgs.gov/.)
17. GIS Data Page 2016. (Accessed January 9, 2017, at http://pittsburghpa.gov/dcp/gis/gis-data-new.)
18. The Allegheny Regional Asset District. 2017. (Accessed January 31, 2017 at http://radworkshere.org/pages/history.)
19. Municipalities Financial Recovery Act Amended Recovery Plan: City of Pittsburgh
20. Allegheny County, Pennsylvania. 2014. (Accessed January 31, 2017 at http://dced.pa.gov/download/City%20Of%20Pitts­ burgh%202014%20Amended%20Recovery%20Plan%20Adopted%202014%2006%2024%20Pdf/?wpdmdl=58397.) org/sites/default/files/report_pittsburgh_FINAL_PDF_0.pdf.)
23. Operations & Infrastructure Transition Team. 2013. (Accessed January 5, 2017, at http://pittsburghpa.gov/mayor/transi­ tion/operations-infrastructure.)
24. Sebastian S. Big Pittsburgh, Small Pittsburgh. Pittsburgh Post-Gazette 2016 April 17, 2016.
25. About Almono. 2016. (Accessed December 14, 2016, at http://almono.org/about-almono.)
26. The Green First Plan: A City-Wide Green Infrastructure Assessment - 353310 Draft. 2016. (Accessed December 14, 2016, at http://apps.pittsburghpa.gov/pwsa/PWSA_City_Wide_Report_11-10-16_DRAFT.pdf.)
27. Barriers and Bridges: An Action Plan for Overcoming Obsticales and Unlocking Opportunities for African American Men in tion-plan-overcoming-obstacles-and-unlocking-opportunities-african-american-men-pittsburgh.) tal-holc-maps/.)
29. Benzing J. How institutions and society fail Pittsburgh's black girls. PublicSource2016.
30. 2016 Report to the Community on Public School Progress in Pittsburgh. 2016. (Accessed December 15, 2016, at http://
31. Allegheny County Health Department. Plan for a Healthier Allegheny. 2015.
32. McCart M. Mapping hunger: Where are Pittsburgh's food deserts? Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. Pittsburgh, PA2014.
33. Sheehan A. Pittsburgh Housing Market One Of Nation’s Hottest. CBS Pittsburgh 2015 November 18, 2015.
34. Benzing J. In Pittsburgh, neighborhood violence lives next door to prosperity. PublicSource2016.
35. Fraser J. African Americans in Pittsburgh: The Data in Black and White. Pittsburgh Quarterly. Pittsburgh, PA2013.
36. Bureau of Police 2014 Statistical Report. 2014. (Accessed December 15, 2016, at http://apps.pittsburghpa.gov/pgh­ bop/2014_Annual_Report_Final_draft.pdf.) org/2016/10/13/transportation-vision-affordable-pittsburgh/.) sheets/transandhousing.pdf.)
39. Anatomy of water main break. 905 WESA2013.
40. City of Pittsburgh Office of Emergency Management and Homeland Security. Hazard Vulnerability Assessment: City of 
Pittsburgh. 2013.
41. NationalBridges. The National Bridge Inventory Database. 2015.
42. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. United States' Notice of Lodging of Proposed Consent Decree and Motion for Stay of Litigation. Washington, DC: EPA Environmental Enforcement Section; 2007.
43. Litvak A. In Pittsburgh's neighborhoods, a natural gas leak every 2 miles. Pittsburgh Post-Gazette 2016 November 16.
44. Development USDoHaU. 2011 Housing Profile: Pittsburgh, PA. 2011.
45. Polar Vortex Review. 2014. (Accessed January 14, 2016, at http://alleghenyconference.org/PDFs/Misc/January2014Polar­
VortexReview.pdf.)
46. Dietrich W. A very brief history of Pittsburgh. Pittsburgh Quarterly 2008.
the-air/sota-2016-full.pdf.)
48. Guza M. In Mon Valley Steel Towns, Shrunken Communities and an Increase of Crime. Point Park News Service 2014 July 8.
49. Miller T, Lauer A, Mihok B, Haywood K. A Continuum of Care Approach: Western Pennsylvania's Response to the Opioid 
Epidemic. Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Institute of Politics; 2016.
ship.org/research-library/workplace-fairness/fair-pay/pittsburgh-women-and-the-wage-gap.pdf.)
51. MyTreeKeeper.com. 2015. (Accessed January 14, 2016, at http://pittsburgh.mytreekeeper.com/.)
52. Pittsburgh i-Tree Ecosystem Analysis. 2015. (Accessed December 15, 2016, at http://waterlandlife.org/assets/i-Tree%20
Eco%20Pittsburgh%20FINAL.pdf.) tures/urban-tree-canopy/.)
54. Bradford K, Abrahams L, Hegglin M, Klima K. A Heat Vulnerability Index and Adaptation Solutions for Pittsburgh, Pennsyl­ vania. Environmental Science & Technology 2015;49:11303-11.
55. Landslide Overview Map of the Conterminous United States. U.S. Geological Survey, 1982. (Accessed January 19, 2017, at http://landslides.usgs.gov/hazards/nationalmap/.)
56. Khan N, Kanik A. 1.5 million at risk in PA for crude oil derailment. PublicSource2015.
57. URA Market Value Analysis. 2017. (Accessed January 9, 2017, at http://pittsburghpa.gov/dcp/mva.) blog/making-sense-of-map-the-meal-gap-2015/.)
59. City of Pittsburgh Dept. of City Planning. Neighborhoods with SNAP Data. Western Pennsylvania Regional Data Center; 
2017.
60. City of Pittsburgh. Pittsburgh Greenways. Western Pennsylvania Regional Data Center; 2017.
61. City of Pittsburgh. Operations Green Spaces. Western Pennsylvania Regional Data Center; 2015.
62. City of Pittsburgh. Comprehensive Parks List. Western Pennsylvania Regional Data Center; 2015.
63. City of Pittsburgh. District Energy Pittsburgh; 2015.
64. Pittsburgh p4 Initiative. p4 Performance Measures; 2016.
65. Wage-Earning Pittsburgh. New York: Russell Sage Foundation; 1914.

[Page 49]
Initiate
Coordinate
Amplify
Accelerate
Develop and implement new initiatives. 
Next steps entail identifying lead organizations and assembling working groups to begin action plans.
Align ongoing actions with multiple owners and actors to a common set of goals. Next steps; involve determining governance processes and roles and responsibilities for diverse partners.
Expand scope, reach, and/or impact of pilot or recently initiated actions. Next steps entail identifying the ways in which actions ought to be expanded, additional resources required, and plans or proposals for new funding resources.
Support the implementation and/or uptake of existing actions with established leadership and concrete next steps. Next steps involve creating action plans to fasttrack specific elements of each action group.
APPENDIX A: 
ACTIONS LIST understand, and organize collective city-wide resilience building, actions have been grouped. The taxonomy in this appen­ dix highlights the status of each “action group” (a group of actions with similar intended benefit) which are also identified in strategy implementation. Each category requires a particular type of effort and, in some cases, a specific approach to collabo­ ration and measurement.
INITIATE
Integrating social services into Pittsburgh Public Schools (PPS Community Schools)
A Pittsburgh Community Schools model would designate district buildings to serve as hubs for social-service programs for students and the neighborhood. Community schools provide students with equitable access to programs and services like medical care, psychological services, access to a food bank, English as a second language training or work education programs all in a familiar building: a public school. Westinghouse High School in Pittsburgh’s Homewood neighborhood has been operating as a community school for several years and offers a model and lessons learned for scaling to the city level.
Goals
People
Objectives
HEALTH, FOOD, EDUCATION, COLLABORATION
Sub-actions
Pittsburgh Public Schools Community Schools, Westinghouse Full Service Communi­ ty School
Possible action lead(s) & Partners
Partner lead
Providing Pre-K for all of Pittsburgh’s children
Pittsburgh’s children currently have unequal access to pre-K education, resulting in disparities in educational outcomes later in life. The City of Pittsburgh plans to pursue the funding, organizational structure, and capacity necessary to ensure pre-K is available to all of Pittsburgh’s children.
Goals
People
Objectives
EDUCATION
Sub-actions
Mayor’s Blue Ribbon Panel on Early Childhood Education
Possible action lead(s) & Partners
City of Pittsburgh and partners 
Creating a circular economy in Pittsburgh
The city’s circular economy or waste-to-energy strategy, an innovative approach to managing Pittsburgh’s waste manage­ ment challenges while simultaneously reducing its carbon footprint, is in early stages. Local working groups established action plans and are working to implement short-term steps. Once fully implemented, the circular economy will result in upgrades to the city’s waste management infrastructure, provide a source of renewable energy to help the city reach its 2030 climate goals, and provide new employment opportunities for Pittsburghers.
Goals
Place, Planet
Objectives
LOCAL AND RENEWABLE ENERGY, RESOURCE EFFICIENCY, RESILIENT DESIGN
Sub-actions
Circular economy
Possible action lead(s) & Partners
Enhancing city-to-city collaboration around shared issues
The City of Pittsburgh is involved in global sharing networks with cities around the world. These collaborations—from our 
Sister Cities to the 100RCNetwork to the German Marshall Fund’s Transatlantic Cooperation Network—are intended to sup­ port city-to-city information sharing and collaborative problem solving around common issues. Rather than each city starting from scratch to solve its own problems, these networks establish lines of communication and opportunities to scale and replicate successful solutions world-wide.
Goals
Performance
Objectives
COLLABORATION
Sub-actions
Sister City planning, 100 Resilient Cities network sharing
Possible action lead(s) & Partners
100 Resilient Cities network, especially with Sister City and fellow 100 RC DaNang, 
Vietnam
Initiate

[Page 50]
Enhancing Pittsburgh’s fiscal capacity in partnership with non-profits (Payment in Lieu of Taxes (PILOT))
Pittsburgh’s non-profits are an important economic engine for the city, employing many Pittsburghers, serving the city’s residents, contributing to its national profile, and providing some of the city’s largest land-owning institutions, particularly its health and educational institutions. However, these institutions are tax-exempt and do not significantly contribute to the city’s fiscal capacity. As Pittsburgh continues to pull itself out of financial distress, the city will explore options for payment in lieu of taxes from non-profits in the city.
Goals
Performance
Objectives
COLLABORATION
Sub-actions
Payment in Lieu of Taxes (PILOT)
Possible action lead(s) & Partners
City of Pittsburgh, Mayor’s Office 
Exploring ways of institutionalizing the resilience lens in city processes
Embedding resilience in the capital budgeting process is a next logical step after the signing of the Resilience Pledge, the commitment of Mayor Peduto to dedicate at least 10% of the city’s capital budget to resilience-related activities. This process would build upon best practices in utilizing the resilience lens as a decision-making tool for making capital budget decisions in order to achieve the most “resilience bang for our buck.” Additionally, a Resilience Compact, similar to the Southeast Florida 
Regional Climate Change Compact and others, would formalize a partnership among local leaders and highlight strategies needed to collaboratively address resilience in Pittsburgh.
Goals
Performance
Objectives
COLLABORATION
Sub-actions
Resilience in capital budgeting, 10% Resilience Pledge, Resilience Compact
Possible action lead(s) & Partners
Budget; Boulder and New Orleans 100RC network sharing
Exploring the creation of the Resilience Institute of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh has wealth of research institutions, including its universities, consultancies, and independent research institutions, that are already engaged in work to benefit the city and improve the ways in which it operates. While city data is increasingly available via shared data systems, demands for analytical capabilities are growing to ensure that data can be used to inform decision-making. The city’s data and analysis assets highlight an opportunity to institutionalize a core of researchers dedicat­ ed to resilience-related topics. The city will explore ways in which it can capitalize upon its homegrown research capacity to help it solve future challenges, such as exploring ways to repurpose Pittsburgh’s waste for energy.
Goals
Performance
Objectives
COLLABORATION, MEASUREMENT
Sub-actions
Resilience Institute of Pittsburgh
Possible action lead(s) & Partners
City of Pittsburgh, Department of Innovation and Performance and partners 
Articulating connections between students and resources to serve PPS students more effectively
Consolidating student information and streamlining access to resources that are currently dispersed across agencies will result in a more robust information system. Articulating transparent protocols for connecting students to available resources will better serve student needs. This effort will increase the collective impact of current programs, services, and education ini­ tiatives by improving communication and coordination between and among professionals and the families they support. The goal is to connect more students to the resources they want and need when they want and need them so they can succeed in school and after graduation. 
Goals
Performance, People
Objectives
EDUCATION, COLLABORATION, MEASUREMENT
Sub-actions
Student Connections
Possible action lead(s) & Partners
Partner lead 
Measuring Pittsburgh’s resilience and wellbeing (Pittsburgh Survey, 2.0)
Pittsburgh Survey, 2.0 will not only serve as the measurement framework for this strategy and plan but will also paint a comprehensive picture of what life is like for today’s Pittsburgh residents. It will integrate data from the vast array of ongoing activities in the city as well new data collected from Pittsburgh residents. The Survey will help the city to benchmark and track progress toward the objectives laid out in this strategy, serve as a tool to support decision-making by aligning key priorities and initiatives in the city, and help to integrate and track those priority initiatives within a framework of action.
Goals
Performance
Objectives
COLLABORATION, MEASUREMENT
Sub-actions
Pittsburgh Survey, 2.0
Possible action lead(s) & Partners
City of Pittsburgh and partners

[Page 51]
COORDINATE
Improving outdoor and indoor air quality
County and city agencies, researchers, and community organizations are all involved in studying Pittsburgh’s air quality and its impact on residents. Better coordination of measurement, advocacy, community engagement, and regulatory efforts around air quality in the region would help Pittsburgh to more efficiently and effectively address one of its key public health challenges.
Goals
People, Planet
Objectives
HEALTH, RESILIENT DESIGN
Sub-actions
Speck IAQ Monitor Deployment, Pittsburgh Pollution Data Collection (Breathmo­ biles), Environmental Justice Community Alert Matrix (EJCAM)
Possible action lead(s) & Partners
Partner lead
Promoting equitable development
Equitable development is a “positive development strategy that ensures everyone participates in and benefits from the region’s economic transformation—especially low-income residents, communities of color, immigrants, and others at risk of being left behind.” This action groupt is currently a set of recommendations for eliminating racial inequities and ensuring that all Pittsburghers have the opportunity to live in healthy and safe neighborhoods, to connect to economic opportunity and wealth generation, and to participate in decision-making.
Goals
People
Objectives
HOUSING, DIVERSITY, MIXED USES
Sub-actions
100 Percent Pittsburgh, All-In Pittsburgh, Recommendations for an Equity, Justice and Inclusion Agenda for Pittsburgh
Possible action lead(s) & Partners
Partner lead
Providing food security and healthy food access
Pittsburgh is home to a large number of non-profits working on food security, participates in state and federal programs to increase access to healthy foods, and is expanding its footprint in terms of urban agriculture. But a good number of Pitts­ burghers still go hungry, and many others lack access to a range of healthy food options. Coordinating ongoing initiatives, programs, and actors would help Pittsburgh feed more residents for its efforts.
Goals
People
Objectives
FOOD, HEALTH, EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Sub-actions
Fresh Access Food Bucks Bonus, Fresh Corners, Grub Up, Farm to Food Bank, Commu­ nity Table, 412 Food Rescue, Helping Hands, Senior Box Program
Possible action lead(s) & Partners
City of Pittsburgh and partners; New Orleans 100RC network sharing
Creating green and healthy homes
Efforts to “green” Pittsburgh’s housing stock abound, as do approaches to make the city’s homes healthier and safer places to live. These include a range of players, such as county- and city-administered federal funding for lead issues, private compa­ nies offering incentives and programs to improve energy efficiency, public service providers and city departments conduct­ ing home safety inspections, and non-profits offering programming to help residents to reduce their utility bills. Coordination of these efforts, through programs like the Green and Healthy Homes Initiative, will extend their impact.
Goals
People, Planet
Objectives
HOUSING, HEALTH, RESILIENT HOUSEHOLDS, RESOURCE EFFICIENCY, RESILIENT 
DESIGN
Sub-actions
Green and Healthy Homes, Grassroots Green Homes, Allegheny Lead Safe Homes, 
Free lead testing program, Environment and Energy Community Outreach (EECO) 
Center, Residential efficiency certification systems (e.g., HERS Index; Energy Star), 
Private energy efficiency programs
Possible action lead(s) & Partners
Supporting local and urban agriculture
Pittsburgh’s climate and wealth of green and open space within the city prime it for advancements in local urban agriculture. 
Coordinating ongoing efforts, from community gardens to initiatives at Pittsburgh Public Schools to policy-level approaches to developing local food systems will increase the robustness and redundancy of the city’s food supply.
Goals
People, Place
Objectives
FOOD, VACANT LAND, GREEN SPACE
Sub-actions
Urban Agriculture Zoning Code, Homegrown, Edible Schoolyard, Local Food Supply 
Chain Initiative in Southwestern Pennsylvania
Possible action lead(s) & Partners
City of Pittsburgh, Department of City Planning and partners
Developing and retraining Pittsburgh’s workforce
Over time, Pittsburgh’s economy will need to rely on a new cadre of middle-skilled workers. There are many city-sponsored activities currently underway to assist with workforce development and career and technical training for adults, including technical training programs sponsored by industries anticipating workforce transitions. Better coordination of the city’s ongo­ ing activities would help establish a pipeline of qualified Pittsburghers ready to fill vacancies left by retirees and positioned to take on the jobs of the future in healthcare, technology, energy, utilities, transportation, 21st century manufacturing, and other areas.
Goals
People
Objectives
WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT, ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Sub-actions
Landforce, Electrical Distribution Technology certificate program, Manchester-Bid­ well programming, Appalachia Partnership Initiative,Community Kitchen Culinary 
Training Program
Possible action lead(s) & Partners
City of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh Job Corps Center and partners; DaNang 100RC network sharing
Initiate
Coordinate

[Page 52]
Stimulating small business development
A growing suite of services has been offered by the City of Pittsburgh to promote small business development. These include efforts to connect local startups with the City of Pittsburgh to improve city operations and to give entrepreneurs access to representatives from all relevant departments within city services. Initiatives also help entrepreneurs locate and secure capital resources and provide mentorship opportunities for starting and growing new businesses. Initiatives to grow capital to support knowledge-based start-ups and to expand small businesses started in the city are ongoing. Key next steps will involve developing mechanisms to coordinate capital and to provide a pathway by which new capital can be introduced. 
Goals
People
Objectives
WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT, ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Sub-actions
City of Pittsburgh: LaunchPGH.com, PGH Lab, Small Business Resource Fairs; partners 
Possible action lead(s) & Partners
City of Pittsburgh, Department of Innovation & Performance
Repurposing Pittsburgh’s land for its best and highest use
A number of ongoing and new initiatives in the city have dedicated resources and aim to repurpose Pittsburgh’s more than 
30,000 vacant lots for community benefit. Better coordination and streamlined city processes will allow accelerated conver­ sion of blighted properties and vacant lots into resources for community benefit, such as community gardens, urban forest expansion, rain gardens, or other public space.
Goals
Place, Planet
Objectives
VACANT LAND, GREEN SPACE, PUBLIC SPACE, WATER, NATURAL INFRASTRUCTURE
Sub-actions
Love Your [Resilient] Block, Resilience Generation, URA/City Vacant Lot maintenance process redesign, Adopt-a-Lot, Blight Bootcamp, Lots to Love, ReClaim and Neighbor­ hood Ambassadors, Green Tool Box, Vacant Lot Toolkit
Possible action lead(s) & Partners
City of Pittsburgh, Department of City Planning; URA; partners
Designing and constructing smart and sustainable redevelopment projects
Redevelopment projects in Pittsburgh provide new housing along with office, retail, and recreational opportunities, taking advantage of vacant or underutilized land in key geographies. Key aspects of these efforts include the use of green strategies for building, transportation, water, and energy infrastructure using innovative, home-grown technological solutions; collabo­ ration between diverse government and non-government partners; and community engagement efforts.
Goals
Place
Objectives
MIXED USES, PUBLIC SPACE
Sub-actions
Almono, Uptown EcoInnovation District, Lower Hill Redevelopment, Choice Neigh­ borhood Implementation Grant (Larimer), Produce Terminal Development, City of 
Pittsburgh 
Possible action lead(s) & Partners
City of Pittsburgh, Department of City Planning; URA; Melbourne 100RC network sharing 
Enabling multi-modal transportation
Advocacy groups, non-profit organizations, city and county departments, and county and regional-level coalitions and planning organizations are currently working to expand multi-modal transportation opportunities in and around Pittsburgh. 
Related efforts include “complete streets” policy changes, physical infrastructure construction, Port Authority service changes, and various recommendations in reports and plans at different stages of implementation. Better coordination of this wide range of capital investments, operational improvements, and policy changes will help ensure that these efforts meet city resilience goals and that expanded options continue to be realized for Pittsburghers across the city.
Goals
Place, Planet
Objectives
TRANSPORTATION, RESILIENT DESIGN
Sub-actions
Complete streets executive order/policy, Downtown-Uptown-Oakland Bus Rapid 
Transit (BRT), Green Bike Lanes, Better Bikeways Vision, Bike PGH bike inventory, 
Healthy Ride, Make My Trip Count, 2015 Commuter Survey
Possible action lead(s) & Partners
City of Pittsburgh, Department of Mobility and Infrastructure and partners
Providing access to clean water for drinking and recreation (3 Rivers, 365) “3 Rivers, 365” refers to a set of efforts that aim to ensure that Pittsburgh’s water is fishable, swimmable, and drinkable. Pitts­ burgh’s three rivers are some of its most important assets, and these initiatives address the stormwater management, water quality, and water accessibility issues that currently challenge the city and surrounding region. This set of actions also in­ cludes existing and new efforts by PWSA to identify and resolve issues with elevated lead levels in Pittsburgh’s drinking water. 
Goals
Planet
Objectives
WATER, NATURAL INFRASTRUCTURE
Sub-actions
City-Wide Green First Plan, ALCOSAN Wet Weather Plan, Pilot green infrastructure projects (bioswales, daylighting, Parks waterway management, etc.), Integrated 
Stormwater/ Watershed Management Planning, PWSA Green Infrastructure mainte­ nance, Riverfront Interim Planning Overlay District (IPOD), Route 51 Green Boulevard, 
Stormwater Management Overlay District, Stormwater Management Trust Fund, 
Project 15206, Living Waters of Larimer, Negley Run Watershed Resilience Accelerator, 
PWSA participation in National Green Infrastructure Certification Program, PWSA 
Reorganization, Resilient Stormwater Management in Allegheny County
Possible action lead(s) & Partners
Pittsburgh Water and Sewer Authority; Impact Infrastructure, Inc.; ARCADIS

[Page 53]
AMPLIFY
Enhancing civic education and engagement
Recent technological developments and the institutionalization of processes like the Deliberative Democracy model into the city’s decision-making have provided new and innovative options for civic engagement. Additional effort is needed to expand and increase Pittsburgh’s civic awareness and to ensure that new processes continue to have an impact on civic decisions. New actions are warranted to ensure that traditionally underrepresented groups are able to have a say in what happens in their communities.
Goals
People, Performance
Objectives
RESILIENT HOUSEHOLDS, CIVIC ENGAGEMENT
Sub-actions
Civic Leadership Academy, Deliberative Democracy Forums
Possible action lead(s) & Partners
City of Pittsburgh; Semarang 100RC network sharing
Improving community-police relations
As a participant in the U.S. Department of Justice’s National Initiative for Building Community Trust and Justice, Pittsburgh’s community policing initiatives are in the spotlight. However, the federal program’s future may be in question, and the recent departure of Chief Cameron McClay, who prioritized improved community-police relations during his tenure, leaves local efforts in community outreach, technology-assisted citizen engagement, and open police data can be sustained and ampli­ fied regardless of potential changes in federal support or funding to achieve a greater impact on public safety and improved community-police relations.
Goals
People, Performance
Objectives
SAFETY, CIVIC ENGAGEMENT
Sub-actions
National Initiative for Building Community Trust and Justice, Safer Together, Citizen’s 
Police Academy (CPA)
Possible action lead(s) & Partners
City of Pittsburgh, Department of Public Safety, Bureau of Police
Supporting aging Pittsburghers and those with disabilities
The City of Pittsburgh, Allegheny County, and a number of local non-profits and foundations offer services for Pittsburghers with disabilities. As the population in the region continues to age and demands for services increase, a number of ongoing and new efforts aim to meet the needs of these populations, including offering healthy living opportunities, enabling mobil­ ity, promoting workforce development, enhancing home and community-based care, meeting basic needs, providing access to supportive housing, and other objectives.
Goals
People, Place
Objectives
HEALTH, TRANSPORTATION
Sub-actions
Health Active Living, Snow Angels, Community HealthChoices (CHC), transit accessi­ bility efforts (e.g., ACCESS), 21 and able
Possible action lead(s) & Partners
Citiparks and partners
Supporting veterans and homeless Pittsburghers
Beginning with the Mayors Challenge to End Veteran Homelessness, efforts to support the homeless population, particularly veterans, in the city are beginning to take shape. Technology is connecting people in need with services in innovative ways. 
These and other small-scale projects can be amplified to reach more of their target population.
Goals
People
Objectives
HOUSING, HEALTH
Sub-actions
Mayors Challenge to End Veteran Homelessness, Homefront Pittsburgh, BigBurgh
Possible action lead(s) & Partners
City of Pittsburgh, Mayor’s Office; Housing Authority of the City of Pittsburgh
Confronting and overcoming structural barriers and racism
Workshops and trainings organized by national and local organizations aim to shed light on the historic inequities, systemic bias, and racism that have impacted Pittsburgh’s communities of color over the course of the city’s history. Amplifying these initiatives and building awareness of racism and discrimination among all Pittsburghers will be critical to creating an equita­ ble city for all.
Goals
People, Performance
Objectives
SAFETY, DIVERSITY, CIVIC ENGAGEMENT
Sub-actions
Pittsburgh Peace and Justice Initiative, Dignity and Respect Campaign, Beyond 
Diversity, Trauma intervention workshops, Youth Undoing Institutional Racism (YUIR) 
Weekend
Possible action lead(s) & Partners
Partner lead
Establishing a welcoming and diverse community (Welcoming Pittsburgh)
Mayor Peduto’s Welcoming Pittsburgh Plan aims to improve the lives of immigrants and long-time residents alike by creating informed, diverse, and welcoming experiences throughout the city. Derived from community and Advisory Council input, the plan includes a broad set of recommendations in three categories: Welcome, Neighbor! (creating community connections), 
Bridge to the City (linking residents to government services, policy, and housing), and Prospering Together (promoting eco­ nomic opportunity).
Goals
People
Objectives
WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT, DIVERSITY
Sub-actions
Welcoming Pittsburgh, Bridge ID Program, Vibrant Pittsburgh programming, Hola 
Pittsburgh
Possible action lead(s) & Partners
City of Pittsburgh, Mayor’s Office; 100RC network sharing (sanctuary cities)
Initiate
Coordinate

[Page 54]
Providing 21st century education for youth
In and out of school, Pittsburgh’s children are receiving training and building skills and enthusiasm to pursue 21st centu­ ry jobs in engineering, computer science, advanced manufacturing, and more – sectors that characterize Pittsburgh’s key growth industries. Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts, and Math (STEAM) initiatives are currently being piloted in primary and secondary schools around the region, and select afterschool programs and city-run community centers are exploring ways to integrate these principles into their programming. Expanding the scope of these largely pilot and small-scale efforts would contribute to a school-to-work pipeline accessible to all of Pittsburgh’s children.
Goals
People
Objectives
EDUCATION, WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT
Sub-actions
Rec2Tech, Pittsburgh Learn & Earn Summer Youth Employment Program, PPS STEAM initiatives, career and technical education in PPS, Remake Learning, Allegheny 
Intermediate Unit (AIU) STEAM Grants, Global Passport Project, pre-apprenticeship programs (e.g., Energy Innovation Center), Start on Success, Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA) youth programming
Possible action lead(s) & Partners
City of Pittsburgh and partners; Manchester-Bidwell Corporation (local Platform 
Partner)
Supporting job and life skills for Pittsburgh’s youth of color
A body of data has raised concerns about barriers to healthy development, education, and economic opportunity for Pitts­ burgh’s youth of color. The city participates in the My Brother’s Keeper program, which lays out a roadmap for addressing the opportunity gap for boys and young men of color. A recent report has also offered recommendations for how to positively change the trajectory for Black girls and women. Regardless of how the national My Brother’s Keeper program proceeds in future years, it will be up to local partners to sustain and amplify the impact of the program in Pittsburgh.
Goals
People
Objectives
SAFETY, WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT, DIVERSITY
Sub-actions
Inequities Affecting Black Girls in Pittsburgh and Allegheny County, My Brother’s 
Keeper
Possible action lead(s) & Partners
City of Pittsburgh, Mayor’s Office and partners
Enhancing city government-to-citizen communication
The City of Pittsburgh manages a growing collection of dedicated web pages, mobile applications, social media-based initia­ tives, and telephone and television-based communication channels that facilitate communication between the government and citizens. These services utilize technology, make data and information available to users, allow residents to express their opinions on civic issues, and enable the city to rapidly communicate with residents in case of emergency.
Goals
People, Place, Performance
Objectives
RESILIENT HOUSEHOLDS, COMMUNICATIONS, CIVIC ENGAGEMENT
Sub-actions of Pittsburgh website redesign, City-Nextdoor Partnership, Snow Plow Tracker
Possible action lead(s) & Partners
City of Pittsburgh, Department of Innovation & Performance and partners
Improving corporate sustainability and green buildings
With its wealth of ongoing activity, Pittsburgh is a leader in green buildings and corporate sustainability. As of 2016, the 
Pittsburgh region was home to 378 LEED certified projects, 438 buildings committed to Pittsburgh 2030 District goals, 5 AIA 
COTE Top 10 Award Winners, 2 Living Buildings, a Net Zero Energy certified building, a Sustainable Sites certified building, and a WELL certified building. Momentum is building to expand participation in corporate sustainability and green building programming.
Goals
Planet
Objectives
RESOURCE EFFICIENCY
Sub-actions
Pittsburgh 2030 Districts, Building energy disclosure ordinance, Phipps Center for 
Sustainable Landscapes Living Building Challenge, Green Garage Initiative, Sustain­ able Pittsburgh certifications/challenges, Green Building Council PEER accreditation, 
Green Mountain Energy Sun Club® grants
Possible action lead(s) & Partners
Partner lead
Encouraging neighborhood-based resilience efforts
Because Pittsburgh is a city of neighborhoods, the city’s resilience efforts often take place at a neighborhood level, led by a set of engaged and innovative neighborhood coalitions. These groups promote resident engagement and aim to solve some of the most pressing issues to Pittsburghers, from repurposing vacant land to organizing around affordable housing.
Goals
People, Performance
Objectives
RESILIENT HOUSEHOLDS, CIVIC ENGAGEMENT
Sub-actions
One Northside, Larimer Consensus group, Making a Greater Hazelwood, HELP
Possible action lead(s) & Partners
City of Pittsburgh, Bureau of Neighborhood Empowerment; Department of City 
Planning
Providing opportunities for community service and volunteering
Pittsburgh’s long-standing traditions of social connectivity and civic engagement as well as its wealth of non-profit institu­ tions enables a wide variety of opportunities for Pittsburghers to get engaged in making the city a better place. This strategy presents an opportunity to expand the scope of activities, many coordinated through the city’s ServePGH program, that aim to address resilience-related issues through impact volunteerism, including protecting the urban forest, cleaning up blighted neighborhoods, or assisting Pittsburgh’s elderly or disabled populations.
Goals
Performance
Objectives
CIVIC ENGAGEMENT
Sub-actions
ServePGH, Beautify the ‘Burgh, Resilience Fairs, Urban EcoSteward, Tree Tenders, 
TreeVitalize, Open Your Heart
Possible action lead(s) & Partners
City of Pittsburgh, Mayor’s Office and partners

[Page 55]
ACCELERATE
Addressing the opioid epidemic
There is growing recognition of the need for a coordinated policy response to the opioid epidemic in areas like Western Penn­ sylvania. Current recommendations for the region from the Allegheny County Health Department include mapping how the recommendations of the National Heroin Task Force Report are being implemented on a regional level and setting framework for moving forward. The plan underscores the importance of integrating public health and public safety to reduce overdoses, catalogs regional efforts to highlight existing best practices that can be deployed in other settings, exposes gaps, identifies next steps, and creates a continuum of care model to maximize interventions.
Goals
People
Objectives
HEALTH
Sub-actions
Western Pennsylvania Opioid Response Report and Recommendations
Possible action lead(s) & Partners
Partner lead; Intermedix
Implementing a Public Health 3.0 model
Public Health 3.0 is a federal concept that encourages public health agencies to think differently about their work by fostering public-private partnerships, using data more effectively, and collaborating across government units to foster community wellbeing and preparedness. The effort kicked off in Allegheny County this year and provides a framework for accelerating implementation of the county’s Plan for a Healthy Allegheny (PHA). New initiatives aim to address the priority areas identified in the PHA through the lens of Public Health 3.0, with new partnerships and with a commitment to working toward building a culture of health in the region.
Goals
People
Objectives
HEALTH
Sub-actions
Plan for a Healthier Allegheny (and Community Health Assessment), Live Well 
Allegheny/Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh and Glasgow Welding Health Equity and Resilience 
Together (PGWT), Healthy Together, Let’s Move!, Pittsburgh Parks Rx, Playful Pitts­ burgh Collaboration
Possible action lead(s) & Partners
Preserving and developing affordable housing
The city’s Affordable Housing Task Force, in partnership with community-based organizations and neighborhood coalitions, has developed a suite of recommendations, policies, programs, and initiatives to address access to affordable housing in 
Pittsburgh. Additionally, financing programs and community outreach efforts are focused on improving the quality and sus­ tainability of Pittsburgh’s existing (and aging) housing stock in order to keep the total cost of housing affordable.
Goals
People, Place
Objectives
HOUSING, VACANT LAND
Sub-actions
Affordable Housing Task Force Recommendations, Affordable Housing Trust Fund, In­ clusionary Zoning, Bridges Beyond Blight, Community Acquisition and Rehabilitation 
Loan (CARL) Program, Pittsburgh Home Rehabilitation Program + (PHRP PLUS)
Possible action lead(s) & Partners
City of Pittsburgh, Affordable Housing Task Force
Becoming a city of inclusive innovation (Pittsburgh Roadmap for Inclusive Innovation)
The Roadmap for Inclusive Innovation lays out a number of initiatives the City of Pittsburgh should undertake in the coming months and years to remain a hub of innovation for social groups, companies, and people. Specific action steps have been established to address the digital divide, empower city-to-citizen engagement, provide open data, improve internal city oper­ ations and capacity, advance the clean technology sector, and promote the local business environment.
Goals
Place, Performance
Objectives
COMMUNICATIONS, ENTREPRENEURSHIP, CIVIC ENGAGEMENT
Sub-actions
Pittsburgh Roadmap for Inclusive Innovation
Possible action lead(s) & Partners
City of Pittsburgh, Department of Innovation & Performance
Developing a smart transportation system
Pittsburgh is emerging as a leading center of innovation in autonomous vehicles, smart infrastructure, and other transporta­ tion technologies. Pittsburgh’s Smart Transportation Plan involves developing an open platform and corresponding gover­ nance structure to improve the safety, equity, and efficiency of our transportation network and its interaction with the energy and communications networks. By building on existing technology deployments and increasing fixed and mobile sensors over a number of major “Smart Spine” corridors that connect with primary commercial centers and amenities, Pittsburgh will collect, analyze, visualize, and act on information to improve mobility for residents.
Goals
Place, Planet, Performance
Objectives
TRANSPORTATION, RECAPITALIZED INFRASTRUCTURE, COMMERCIAL TRANSPORT, 
DISASTER RELIABILITY, RESILIENT DESIGN, MEASUREMENT
Sub-actions
SmartPGH Consortium, Smart Spines, LED Streetlight Retrofit Program, Adaptive 
Traffic Signals, cyber resilience best practice and strategy development
Possible action lead(s) & Partners
City of Pittsburgh, Department of Mobility and Infrastructure; Mexico City 100RC network sharing; R20, Microsoft
Initiate
Coordinate
Amplify
Accelerate

[Page 56]
Improving disaster preparedness and response (THIRA and Hazard Mitigation Plan)
Pittsburgh’s Threat and Hazard Identification and Risk Assessment (THIRA) process helps to identify potential manmade or natural threats and hazards to the City of Pittsburgh. Key steps include describing the context, assessing capacity to respond, and developing recommendations, including resource requirements. Planning activities building upon THIRA, including Haz­ ard Mitigation Plan updates, will serve as a blueprint for reducing property damage from natural or manmade disaster and will focus on saving lives from the effects of any future disaster. Moreover, Pittsburgh’s emergency management and public safety sectors provide a model for intra- and inter-government collaboration from which other agencies can learn.
Goals
People, Place, Performance
Objectives
EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS, RESILIENT HOUSEHOLDS, DISASTER RELIABILITY, COL­
LABORATION
Sub-actions
THIRA and Hazard Mitigation Plan Update, Knowledge Center, Citiparks facilities (warming/cooling; wi-fi), National Incident Management system for critical transpor­ tation linkages
Possible action lead(s) & Partners
City of Pittsburgh, Department of Emergency Management and partners
Putting city facilities to their best and highest uses (Strategic Investment & Maintenance Plan)
The City’s Strategic Investment and Maintenance Plan for city assets includes an assessment of the current state of city facil­ ities and the establishment of maintenance schedules and long term investment plans so each facility will be put to its “best and highest use.” It also extends beyond city facilities to begin to develop plans for city streets and sidewalks; for the city’s vehicle fleet; for city owned walls, steps and fences; for urban forests and hillsides; and for public spaces and monuments, among other assets.
Goals
Place
Objectives
RECAPITALIZED INFRASTRUCTURE
Sub-actions
Strategic Investment & Maintenance Plan
Possible action lead(s) & Partners
City of Pittsburgh, Office of Management and Budget
Conserving, investing in, and connecting to nature (Biophilic city)
Pittsburgh’s designation as a Biophilic city sets a course for a city that values its green space, urban forests, biodiversity, and community education and engagement. Biophilic cities are built around nature, giving residents a recognition and affinity for local flora and fauna, providing education, investing in infrastructure that protects nature and brings residents closer to it.
Goals
Place, Planet, Performance
Objectives
GREEN SPACE, NATURAL INFRASTRUCTURE, CIVIC ENGAGEMENT
Sub-actions
Biophilic Cities, Pittsburgh Urban Forest Master Plan, Greenways 2.0, Open Space 
Trust Fund, Pittsburgh Regional Parks Master Plan, Hays land acquisition, Allegheny 
Places Greenway Network, Allegheny County Green Web, Frick Environmental Learn­ ing Center
Possible action lead(s) & Partners
City of Pittsburgh, Division of Sustainability and Resilience and partners; Boulder 
100RC network sharing
Establishing future climate goals and strategies (Climate Action Plan and 2030 Goals)
Pittsburgh’s Climate Action Plan outlines Pittsburgh’s 2030 climate goals for municipal operations, including 50% reductions in energy and water use, 100% renewable energy use, 100% waste diversion, divestment in fossil fuels. The Plan and relat­ ed initiatives establish strategies for local government, businesses, higher education institutions and communities to help achieve the 2030 goals.
Goals
Planet
Objectives
LOCAL AND RENEWABLE ENERGY, RESOURCE EFFICIENCY
Sub-actions
Climate Action Plan (PCAP 3.0) and Pittsburgh Climate Initiative, 100% waste diver­ sion roadmap, City of Pittsburgh Fleet Purchasing Policy, Thriving Earth Exchange
Possible action lead(s) & Partners
City of Pittsburgh, Division of Sustainability and Resilience, AGU - American Geophys­ ical Union; R20
Increasing local renewable energy production
The City of Pittsburgh is committed to increasing production and utilization of local renewable energy sources including hydro, solar, and waste-to-energy. These efforts contribute to achieving the city’s 2030 climate goals and help make the city’s energy infrastructure more robust and sustainable.
Goals
Planet
Objectives
LOCAL AND RENEWABLE ENERGY
Sub-actions
Western Pennsylvania Energy Consortium, Alternative Energy Portfolio Standard (18% by 2021), Solarize Allegheny, Braddock locks and dam hydroelectric power plant, Emsworth locks and dam hydroelectric power plant
Possible action lead(s) & Partners
City of Pittsburgh
Upgrading and improving the resilience of the power grid (District Energy Pittsburgh)
District Energy Pittsburgh is the focus of a memorandum of understanding with the U.S. Department of Energy to use district energy systems to upgrade Pittsburgh’s aging electrical grid with 21st century clean technologies and solutions. It will op­ timize existing systems and infrastructure, support infill development to connect to existing systems, and develop new sys­ tems in order to create a distributed energy system that has the capacity to support innovative renewable energy solutions.
Goals
Place, Planet
Objectives
DISASTER RELIABILITY, LOCAL AND RENEWABLE ENERGY, RESILIENT DESIGN
Sub-actions
District Energy Pittsburgh, MOU with National Energy Technology Lab
Possible action lead(s) & Partners
City of Pittsburgh and partners

[Page 57]
Sharing and integrating data
Data sharing initiatives ongoing in the city with the Western Pennsylvania Regional Data Center, the city’s open data portal, acting as a single data hub support key community initiatives by making public information easier to find and use. Data is increasingly being shared by public sector agencies, academic institutions, and non-profit organizations in order to support action in a range of sectors, including health, transportation, and public safety. Data sharing supports resilience by providing a foundation to address shared issues and reduce the stovepiping that often inhibits collaboration, while also empowering residents with information about their community.
Goals
Performance
Objectives
COLLABORATION, MEASUREMENT
Sub-actions
Western Pennsylvania Regional Data Center (WPRDC), Burgh’s Eye View, Police Data 
Initiative, Cartegraph, Allegheny County Data Sharing Alliance for Health, Pittsburgh 
Dataworks, Pittsburgh Local Data Collaborative
Possible action lead(s) & Partners
City of Pittsburgh, Department of Innovation and Performance and partners

[Page 58]
APPENDIX B: METHODOLOGY and Resilience, RAND Corporation as the strategy partner, and 100RC. The team developed this strategy by researching the challenges facing Pittsburgh, gathering input from a wide range of stakeholders, convening residents for Deliberative 
Community Forums using the Deliberative Democracy process, and connecting with other members of the 100RC network. 
From June 2015 through January 2017, more than 500 Pittsburghers were engaged to support the strategy development (Figure 10).
Figure 10. Activities comprising Phase 1 of the strategy development process
June 2015
Initial workshop with focus groups concentrating on: Academic, Civic, 
Business, Philanthropy, Neighborhoods & ???????
October 2015
City/Stakeholders Workshop
November 2015
Deliberative Community Forums with 
150 participants
January 2016
Steering Committee 
Determining and prioritizing stresses and shocks
The city developed a preliminary list of stresses (chronic, long-term, slow-burning issues) and shocks (sudden, large-scale disasters) for Pittsburgh’s application to become a member of the 100RC network. This was augmented with additional items drawn from secondary sources, and resulting items were prioritized using a rating activity during the Pittsburgh resilience strategy kick-off workshop in June 2015. The list was reviewed and vetted by subsequent focus groups and working sessions during Phase 1 to produce the Preliminary Resilience Assessment. 
Developing Pittsburgh’s resilience framework: goals, objectives, and actions
Phase 1 concluded with the identification of discovery and overarching themes which informed the more in-depth research, additional engagement, brainstorming of new solutions, prioritization, and synthesis work that took place in Phase 2 (Figure 
11). Cross-sector working groups were assembled around the discovery areas, which correspond to the goals of this strategy and elements of the p4 framework: basic needs and opportunity (People) and infrastructure and land use (Place). A working group was also assembled to discuss the overarching issue of Systems Performance (Performance), primarily focused on fragmentation and coordination of agencies working on shared issues. All working groups considered Pittsburgh’s resilience through the lens of sustainability (Planet). In addition, the issue of equity was at the core of the discussion for all working groups and was ultimately reflected in the final list of resilience goals and objectives.
Figure 11. Engagement and strategy development process in Phase 2 
May 2016
Discovery Area Workshops:
July-August 2016
Systems Performance Workshops
July - October 2016
In-depth research activities
November 2016
Steering Committee Review
Pittsburgh’s vision for the future; A resilient 
Pittsburgh
Cross-sector working groups met two to three times over the course of Phase 2. These groups, comprised of 8 to 12 members, included representatives from city and county government; local non-profit organizations; universities, research, and consultancy groups; architects and design firms; philanthropy; banking; technology; and other sectors. Meetings were designed to explore the issues identified for the respective discovery area; identify further areas for analysis; and brainstorm and prioritize goals, objectives, measurable outcomes, and existing and new actions. 
The goals and objectives described in this strategy come directly from the working groups. Working groups reviewed information about their respective discovery areas and were tasked with developing a single, high-level goal for their area be different in the year 2050, one generation from now?” They brainstormed goal statements and collaboratively refined the wording over the course of the two workshops. Participants were also asked to brainstorm measurable objectives that were specific to the discovery area and that would support achievement of the established goal. A prioritization activity followed, and a list of five to seven sector-specific objectives related to the goal were agreed upon for each discovery area. Discovery area goals and objectives were aligned with the p4 framework to create the final resilience goals and objectives framework for 
Pittsburgh. 
Additionally, stakeholders contributing to the strategy development, coupled with desktop research, identified a working list 
Some actions focused on specific sites (for example, the Green Garage Initiative in some of Pittsburgh’s downtown parking garages), while others recommended changes city- or region-wide (for example, Roadmap for Inclusive Innovation). The level of activity and number of ongoing actions suggest that new actions are being initiated regularly, so this list should be considered determined where new actions were needed to address unmet needs. Consequently, this strategy includes new actions as well

[Page 59]
as ongoing actions that need improved coordination, could be broadened in scope or funding level, or would yield greater benefit with an accelerated timeline. 
Using the resulting list, the resilience team grouped actions according to general topic area or sector of influence to create “action groups,” which were prioritized for the strategy. Some groups were defined by a single, larger-scale action (for example, 
Welcoming Pittsburgh), while others were defined by several smaller-scale actions related to a common topic. Each action group includes a number of programs, initiatives, and policies (referred to as “sub-actions”). Prioritized action groups met the following criteria:
• They yield a resilience dividend, operating across shocks and/or stresses to achieve co-benefits.
• They address one or more of Pittsburgh’s resilience objectives.
• There is clear leadership by an organization, or ideally, a consortium or collaboration of organizations working on the action.
• They are a priority for the Mayor’s Office and/or community stakeholders.
• They are catalytic and represent innovation beyond “business as usual” for a city.
• There is fiscal support for the action.
These action groups are intended to yield progress towards multiple resilience goals and objectives simultaneously, helping to yield a resilience dividend for the city. As a result, each action group can support multiple objectives. 
APPENDIX C: ACRONYM LIST
100RC 100 Resilient Cities
AGU American Geophysical Union
AIU Allegheny Intermediate Unit
ALCOSAN Allegheny County Sanitary Authority
BRT Bus Rapid Transit
CARL Community Acquisition and Rehabilitation Loan 
CERT Community Emergency Response Teams
CHC Community HealthChoices 
CONNECT Congress of Neighboring Communities
CPA Citizen’s Police Academy 
CRO Chief Resilience Officer 
EECO Environment and Energy Community Outreach
EJCAM Environmental Justice Community Alert Matrix
ELDI East Liberty Development, Inc.
HELP Homewood, East Hills, East Liberty, Lincoln-Lemington-Belmar, and Larimer Protection Initiative 
IPOD Interim Planning Overlay District 
LEED Leadership in Energy & Environmental Design
MVA Market Value Analysis 
NGO nongovernmental organization
PCAP Pittsburgh Climate Action Plan 
PGWT Pittsburgh and Glasgow Welding Health Equity and Resilience Together
PHA Plan for a Healthy Allegheny 
PHRP Pittsburgh Home Rehabilitation Program 
PILOT Payment in Lieu of Taxes 
PBEOC Pittsburgh Black Elected Officials Coalition
P&JI Pittsburgh Peace and Justice Initiative
PPS Pittsburgh Public Schools 
PRA Preliminary Resilience Assessment 
PWSA Pittsburgh Water and Sewer Authority
STEAM Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts, and Math 
THIRA Threat and Hazard Identification and Risk Assessment 
URA Urban Redevelopment Authority 
WIOA Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act
WPRDC Western Pennsylvania Regional Data Center
YUIR 
Youth Undoing Institutional Racism

[Page 61]
City of Pittsburgh
Department of City Planning
414 Grant Street
Pittsburgh, PA 15219