[Page 2]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
Thank you to the many people from Bristol and beyond, especially the team at Arup, that have contributed – by encouraging, challenging and inspiring - to the development of this strategy.

[Page 3]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
Forewords
1. Introduction and context
Why urban resilience
Why now and why 50 years? 
Learning from our past
Unlocking the future
2. Understanding resilience
Overview
Approach
3. Resilience paradoxes
4. Framing our future
Our Vision
5. Reimagining the city
People
Place
Organisations
Prosperity and Worth
Regional to Global
6. Operationalising resilience
7. Next steps

[Page 4]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
Bristol, Bristol the city that was built on the bricks of heroic hardship.
Bristol, Bristol the place of dreams and possibilities the place of creative aspirations culture commerce and its own seductive music.
Bristol, Bristol a place still haunted by the ancestral ghost that echoes the historical hangover that yet sobered us up to what time hasn’t changed
Bristol, Bristol. Take a walk. Be inspired. Feel the magical connection see a positive future Come dance in this festival of ideas.
See, we don’t have to wait for carnival every year. 
The party is right now right here,
This very stage, the very atmosphere is encouraging us to lose our fear cause geographically there’s no no go areas round here.
Stand on the suspension bridge see the communities, within a community,
Integrated no segregated and in the distance you can almost reach out and grab Glastonbury.
Oh, city of paradoxes why all this controversy, 
Oh, conflicting urbanisation I love you but what are you doing to me? 
Admits the beauty I regularly see the women of the street exploiting their femininity, 
Being exploited by their calamity.
I love you Bristol, I love the clamour of the weekend drinkers and the hustle and the bustle of the 9-5.
I hate you Bristol as I watch every day the young kiddy with the old weathered face in a Tesco shop doorway clinging to his blanket of security begging to survive. 
I love you because of my first kiss from Samantha because of the smell of Pie minster. 
Because of the aroma of Agnes Spencer, because of the pull of colourful air balloons floating aimlessly in a blue sky. 
I love you Bristol cause of the first play I wrote here, cause of the first film we shot here,
Cause of the first poem I performed here and left my inspired listeners with one notion; Just Try!
I question the graffiti that glares at you echoing the voices of imprisoned youth, 
Then I hear a differed cheer, the screams of Rovers and City fans on a Saturday morning celebrating a different truth. 
I belong here Bristol amongst the riots and the protest, amongst the fighting for equality,
I belong here Bristol amongst the Ranters and the ravers, the Gospel singers The multi-cultural students studying effectively,
I belong here Bristol With the Bristol blue taxis the cheers drive shirt and jeans top Blokes braving the winter streets to look cool,
I belong here Bristol with the scantily clad beautified stiletto brigade wearing the same skirts they used to wear to school,
Bristol Bristol by Miles Chambers (Bristol Poet Laureate) http://mileschambershilton.com

[Page 5]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
I belong here Bristol with the privileged pupils parade their privileged uniforms and the under privileged not being encouraged to perform, 
I belong here Bristol you taught me the special secrets of wild life and movie makers can see the magic in this storm,
I belong here Bristol amongst the travellers and the hippies the ask me to think about life in a different way,
I belong here Bristol amongst those that visit to work and study and exclaim I just gotta stay.
I belong here Bristol with the “Old Money” Business and the entrepreneurs wheeling dealing trying to own this city,
I belong here Bristol with all those food crazed ideas and food crazed delicious somethings emulating whatshisname; Jamie,
I belong here Bristol with the Bristol sound echoing sentiments of who I am flowing through my ears,
I belong here with the faith based streets trying to get you to come to God with all your fears,
Oh, city of paradoxes where you gonna take me today. 
Oh, conflicting urbanisation are you gonna show me a better way.
So what fate awaits this colourful city.
We need to consider every beneficial possibility. 
Transport punctuality,
Drugs and social policy,
Religion ethnicity,
Multiculturalism and unity,
Economy and prosperity,
Education and opportunity,
Business and creativity,
Media and honesty,
Religion and spirituality,
Acknowledgement and generosity,
I belong here with the good schools offering a good future to a bad past. The bad schools offering a bad future to a good past.
It’s here on these streets that the youth are spitting the lyrics of the future that will change the wrong decisions of the past. 
I belong here! Right now in this place we have the opportunity to be something great, something amazing together… 
To utilise the collective potential of us all. That will make this place unique and special… Let’s answer the call. I belong right here!

[Page 6]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
FOREWORD FROM 
RESILIENCE SOUNDING 
BOARD
THE WORLD IS CHANGING; BRISTOL IS CHANGING
Bristol is an independent-thinking, sustainable and culturally diverse city with a high quality of life. Bristol is thriving. 
But there is no room for complacency. Our city – and the wider world with which it is vitally interdependent – is an increasingly complex and uncertain place. Changes are occurring at unprecedented rates in our economy, job markets, technology, environment, politics and population, and consequently our challenges are becoming both more severe and more unexpected. The City region’s economic and physical growth, consequences of our success, also mean rising resource consumption and greater demands on health services and infrastructure. Meanwhile, our more chronic challenges remain: the gap between the rich and poor in Bristol is unacceptably wide, and growing; our current infrastructure connects us but also divides us; and our ambitions to be truly sustainable are constrained by our own resistance to change, national and international policies, and a lack of appropriate financing. 
These challenges will not be resolved quickly; they will require investment, greater trust and social cohesion, and new social and technological innovations. Building a resilient future will be difficult and it will take time. 
And so it must start now.
That journey, however, is also an opportunity. The truly resilient cities of the 
21st century will not simply manage risk or deal with challenges. They will evolve and become stronger through creativity, adaptability and flexibility. 
By enabling the capacity and ingenuity of all of their citizens, these cities will use every disaster, crisis or challenge to recover in a stronger, smarter and fairer way. 
VISION
Our vision: By 2066 Bristol is a flourishing, welcoming city which inspires confidence in local and global investors, and our success is shared by all. Our neighbourhoods are affordable, attractive, healthy and well-connected places where people of all ages and backgrounds trust and help each other. Our infrastructure and services are flexibly designed and managed to cope with uncertainty. 
We believe that resilience = flourishing for all in the face of future uncertainty

[Page 7]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
COLLECTIVE ACTION
The vision of resilience articulated here is a distinctively ‘Bristol’ vision, and it is a genuinely collective one, emerging from not only rigorous data analysis but also the experiences and opinions of thousands of Bristolians as well as national and international friends. The Resilience Sounding Board was created to provide diverse perspectives and to critically challenge one another and the political leadership of the city. The Board includes those familiar with the expected resilience topics, including infrastructure, planning, climate change, disaster management and transport, but also those familiar with digital media, finance, social cohesion and the voluntary sector. But the 
Board knows that it does not have most of the answers nor speak for all of 
Bristol, and we hope that we have approached this task with humility. We have engaged over 1600 people from across the city and we have learned from and been inspired by them. Moreover, many of our Board members embarked on complementary initiatives, bringing in the perspectives of thousands of others. Throughout, our approach was to look backwards from a 50 year future vision to the present day, debating and discussing where and how we can work together with confidence to unlock creativity, disrupt business as usual and take the “right” next steps to set us on course. We thank all of you with whom we have engaged and all of those with whom we hope to engage soon.
Based on those diverse perspectives, we have co-created this Resilience 
Strategy, comprising a 50 year vision, resilience pillars, goals and transformative actions, all outlined in this document. In the spirit of resilience, this is not a fixed strategy replete with actions that might become inappropriate in our changing world, but rather a framework. There are too many unexpected challenges awaiting us and too many brilliant ideas waiting to be unleashed to dictate what actions must be taken. More fundamentally, resilience is not about proposing simple solutions to complex problems but about creating a political, cultural, and social framework that embeds resilience in every day decision making. To stimulate action and debate we do propose some initial actions, but we intend these to be only the start, seeds of change that along with many others will help our city adapt, survive and flourish in the face of future uncertainty.

[Page 8]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
NAVIGATING OUR JOURNEY
This strategy – in the spirit of something that is both complex and collaborative – is intended to be a dynamic process that will change over time as more people become involved, our collective thinking evolves and new challenges and opportunities emerge. We did not start from scratch but built on some visionary work already done in the city such as High in 
Hope 2050 produced by The Initiative, Business West. We see this Strategy as a compass by which to seek and find a wide range of exciting and transformative actions – many of which have not yet been thought of or tested at a city scale.
In other words, we are on a journey. The Strategy will need to have a clear owner and be resourced to make sure it can be implemented. Eventually, it must be adopted and its spirit incorporated across the city; but crucially at this early stage, it must be embedded in the political institutions of Bristol.
Therefore, we call for a legacy structure that can implement the first steps of this Strategy while convening a city-wide approach to building resilience. 
But that legacy eventually will be owned by all of us, and so this document is most of all…
AN OPEN INVITATION 
The members of the Sounding Board are fully committed to supporting the delivery of this Strategy, whether as representatives of their organisations or as your fellow citizens. We hope that it can catalyse new ideas and inspire all of us to work together. We invite you – as an individual or as part of an organisation - to be part of this exciting journey. Contribute to the development of the initiatives proposed here and propose your own. Share your plans to become more resilient and your plans to help others. Challenge yourselves, each other and us to live up to the ideals presented here. We must be creative, flexible and adaptable but most of all, we must work together - the best way to become resilient is for all of us to become resilient. 
Ann Cousins, Senior Consultant and 
100RC Strategy Partner, Arup
Clare Reddington, Creative Director, 
Watershed
Di Robinson, Director of 
Neighbourhoods, Bristol City Council
Doug Owen, freelance human factors consultant
Ian Barrett, Chief Executive Avon 
Wildlife Trust and West of England 
Local Nature Partnership Board
Ian Roderick, Director, Schumacher 
Institute
James Vaccaro, Strategy Director, 
Triodos Bank
Jim Gillman, Head of Civil Protection 
Unit, Bristol City Council
Jim Longhurst, Assistant ViceChancellor, Environment and 
Sustainability, University of West of 
England
Kalpna Woolf, 91 Ways, LEP Skills
Michele Farmer, Early Intervention 
Service Director, Bristol City Council
Nick Sturge, Director of Engine Shed and SETSquared
Patric Bulmer, Director of Environment, 
Bristol Water
Paul Hassan, Locality and (ex) Voscur
Peter Lipman, Global Transition 
Network and ex-Sustrans
Rich Pancost, Head of Cabot Institute, 
University of Bristol
Sally Hogg, Health Places, Healthy 
People Manager, Bristol City Council
Sarah Allen, Bristol Operations Director, 
Avon Fire and Rescue
Sarah Toy, Chief Resilience Office, 
Bristol City Council
Stephen Hilton, Director of Futures, 
Bristol City Council (Chair)
Sumita Hutchinson, (ex) Equality and Community Manager, Avon and 
Somerset Police
Flourishing 
Resilient City
Fair
Every person living in Bristol has the assets and opportunities to enjoy a good quality of life.
Liveable
The city centre and neighbourhoods are great places for people of all ages to live, work, learn and play.
Sustainable
The city and region prosper within environmental limits through adopting new behaviours and technology.
Agile
Bristol citizens and leaders make agile decisions based on shared priorities and real-time information.
Connected
A strong network of local communities and organisations promotes trust, cooperation and shared action across the city.

[Page 9]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
Letter from the President of 100 Resilient Cities
Michael Berkowitz
On behalf of the entire 100 Resilient Cities team, I want to congratulate the city of Bristol on the release of the Bristol Resilience Strategy. In this bold strategy, Bristol is taking an honest and proactive view of the challenges the city faces today and in the fifty years to come. It shows no complacency with the leaps Bristol has already made, and unlocks resilience paradoxes by transforming them into opportunities.
Bristol’s entrepreneurial, creative and pragmatic spirit is reflected throughout this strategy. It represents a call to action for all Bristolians in a pursuit to strengthen social and environmental justice. None of this could have been possible without the excellent engagement of the Resilience 
Sounding Board members. With backgrounds ranging from community organisations to universities and local businesses, these Bristolians ensured multi-stakeholder voices were heard. I also want to thank Bristol’s Chief 
Resilience Officer, Sarah Toy, for her tireless dedication in driving the Bristol 
Resilience Strategy process forward. 
The release of the strategy marks an important milestone for the city. Yet the work is far from over. Mayor Rees’s establishment of the City Office will be an innovative way to include a wide range of stakeholders working on resilience challenges in Bristol. Actions that address homelessness and enhance opportunities for meaningful work experience are but a few points named in this strategy that will secure a more resilient and equal 
Bristol.
As one of the cities selected in the first round of the the 100 Resilient Cities 
Challenge, Bristol has been on the forefront of leading our global resilience movement. We anticipate that the implementation of this strategy will become best practices that other cities within the 100RC Network will emulate. We are thrilled to celebrate Bristol’s achievement in releasing the 
Bristol Resilience Strategy, and look forward to our continued partnership as Bristol spreads the urban resilience movement to cities across the 
United Kingdom and the world.
Sincerely,
Michael Berkowitz 
President, 100 Resilient Cities
Michael Berkowitz 
President of 100 Resilient Cities

[Page 10]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
Bristol has consistently been voted one of the best places to live. It’s a city full of green space, a vibrant culture known for its colourful houses, grand bridges, hot air balloons and Banksy. And it is a great city, a prosperous city, all this is true.
But there is another Bristol, one that tourists and even some of our citizens never see – the city of poverty and inequality. We have 42 areas among the 10% most deprived in England and 16% of our residents live in poverty. There is a persistent life expectancy gap between the most and least deprived areas (an estimated gap of 9.6 years for men and 7 years for women).
And we know that the future will be even more challenging for cities like 
Bristol. We need to be prepared for more extreme weather, a growing and ageing population and a changing job market. All of these factors will impact most on our poorest citizens unless we focus on making their lives, and their children’s lives, better.
That is why I am committed to taking the long view to lead Bristol towards a future where nobody is left behind. As set out in this 50 year strategy, my vision is to build a liveable city of opportunity built on fairness and inclusion. A resilient city, both socially and environmentally, which offers prosperity for all.
We cannot achieve this alone. We need all our city organisations – and our citizens - to work together towards shared priorities. The Resilience 
Sounding Board has modelled this new way of working and the 
Resilience Strategy gives us a compass for our future direction of travel. 
We could not have done this work without the inspiration and support of the 100RC Foundation and the other cities in the network and we are truly thankful and proud to be part of this global movement.
Building a resilient Bristol will be difficult and it will take time. But together we can do it if we start now.
 
Marvin Rees 
Mayor of Bristol
Letter from the Mayor
Marvin Rees

[Page 11]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
1. INTRODUCTION 
AND CONTEXT
WHY URBAN RESILIENCE?
We live in a fast-changing, globally connected world. Bristol, like many other cities, faces challenges from a growing and changing population, climate change, resource scarcity, ageing infrastructure, changing patterns of world markets and employment, disruptive technologies and social and health inequalities. Currently, economic and physical growth is coupled with a growth in resource consumption, a trajectory that Bristol and other cities around the world will be unable to sustain as they continue to expand.
The scale of urban risk, in particular, is increasing due to the growing number of people living in cities. Risk is also increasingly unpredictable due to the complexity of city systems and the uncertainty associated with many hazards – most notably climate change. Communities and economies will need to develop the capacity to survive, adapt and thrive in the face of multiple and unpredictable disruptions in order to be resilient.
With growing recognition of these challenges, programmes to build “resilience” are being developed and implemented by a range of international, national and local organisations. 
Resilience is a term that emerged simultaneously from the fields of engineering, ecology and psychology in the 1970s, to describe the capacity of a system to maintain or recover functionality in the event of disruption or disturbance. It is applicable to cities because they are complex systems that are constantly adapting to changing circumstances.
100 Resilient Cities (100RC) — Pioneered by The Rockefeller Foundation supports 100 selected cities around the world to become more resilient to physical, social and economic shocks and stresses across the city system 
• A funded Chief Resilience Officer position for two years
• Resources and support for preparing a resilience strategy
• A network of cities which face a diverse range of resilience challenges and provide opportunities for information sharing
• A range of services brought to the city public, by private and academic organisations (called Platform Partners)
All 100RC member cities (except Christchurch) have used the same working definition of urban resilience: 
Urban resilience is the capacity of individuals, communities, institutions, businesses, and systems within a city to survive, adapt and grow no matter what kinds of chronic stresses and acute shocks they experience.
Currently, economic and physical growth is coupled with a growth in resource consumption, a trajectory that Bristol and other cities around the world will be unable to sustain as they continue to expand.

[Page 12]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
REFLECTIVE
Able to 
Learn
ROBUST
Limits Spread of Failure
FLEXIBLE
Has Alternative
Strategies
INTEGRATED
Systems Work
Together
RESOURCEFUL
Can Easily Repurpose
Resources
REDUNDANT
Has Backup
Capacity
INCLUSIVE
Broad Consuitation &
Communication
Stresses are chronic conditions which weaken the fabric of a city on a daily or cyclical basis; examples include high unemployment, health inequalities, inefficient public transport systems, endemic violence, and chronic food or water shortages. Acute shocks are sudden, sharp events such as terrorist attacks, fires, floods, earthquakes, and disease outbreaks.
By addressing both the shocks and the stresses, a city becomes more able to respond to adverse events, and is overall better able to deliver basic functions in both good times and bad, to all communities.
The qualities of resilient systems shown in Figure 1 are important in preventing the breakdown or failure of a system or of enabling appropriate or timely action to be taken. Cities can determine their overall resilience by understanding the presence or absence of these qualities within their systems and services.
Bristol has taken the broadest possible view of resilience to help understand how the city can continue to flourish in the face of rapid change. Our focus is on ensuring that resilience helps to break away from “business as usual” to take the city towards a flourishing future by securing multiple, cross-sectoral benefits from every (resilience-related) initiative undertaken.
We also want to demonstrate our commitment to delivering the global 2030 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) as they provide an overarching, long term framework which reconciles environmental priorities with equality and economic opportunity.
100RC is particularly exciting for Bristol as it builds on the success of the city’s year as 2015 European Green Capital. Joining the 100RC Network is an opportunity to consolidate the city’s ambition to be a world leader in resilient and sustainable city development. Our view is that sustainability and resilience are inextricably linked.
Resilience = Flourishing for all in the face of future uncertainty
Figure 1
Source: Arup and the 
Rockefeller Foundation, City 
Resilience Framework, 2014

[Page 13]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
BRISTOL
HEALTHY LIFE EXPECTANCY 
GAP OF 16 YEARS
CITY OF BRISTOL
EUROPEAN 
GREEN 
CAPITAL 
IN 2015
BRISTOL WAS 
FOUNDED IN THE 
EARLY 11TH CENTURY
187 COUNTRIES 
OF BIRTH
45 RELIGIONS
442,500
528,200
1 2014 2 2037 (PROJECTED)
POPULATION
91 LANGUAGES
Figure 2

[Page 14]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
WHY NOW AND WHY 50 YEARS? 
In Bristol our resilience work is looking forward 50 years to 2066 and beyond using a range of tools and engagement methods, with support from the 
Government Office for Science Foresight Future of Cities Team and others, to develop a shared vision of the future and a direction of travel.
By developing an ambitious, long-term trajectory for the city, Bristol can rise to the global and local challenges that we face. Working backwards from a 
50 year future to the present, we aim to unlock creativity and innovation and be confident that we are taking appropriately bold and ambitious steps in the short term.
This 50 year look ahead has helped us to realise the need for action now. In order to develop a flourishing future for Bristol, and improve our resilience to future uncertainty, we cannot wait for change to happen in the future. 
The UN recognises that people are already moving because of climate stresses and changing weather patterns. Many people are already taking action on issues such as these globally. Bristol has the opportunity to be at the vanguard of change - for example by leading on the Sustainable 
Development Goals, but more action is required across sectors now to move us to a flourishing future for the city.
LEARNING FROM OUR PAST
Bristol’s growth and change as a major city since its humble beginnings in the 
11th century has much to teach us about future resilience. Significant social shifts can happen quickly and transform the city (as was seen through the closure of docks or building of the M32, for example) whilst other aspects of the city seem to go in cycles (immigration, regional governance for example). 
Being a resilient city means taking all of this in our stride, whilst constantly placing the welfare and quality of life of citizens at the heart of all action.
Over the past centuries, we have seen a number of transformations in our city. These stories can help to inform our future trajectory:
• We’ve moved from being an important node in the slave trade, to bus boycott and riots, to electing the first mayor of African or Caribbean heritage in Europe in 20163.. 
• Bristol has strong association with Isambard Kingdom Brunel and the history of the railways, and has had a major port for centuries. In 2003 
Concorde’s last ever flight marked Bristol’s significance as a hub for the aerospace industry, and in 2016 Bristol is home to a driverless car pilot4. 
This Bristol 50 Year strategy sets out a direction of travel to:
Bring city stakeholders together around a shared vision and ambitions.
Encourage a city-wide conversation about our common future.
Model a new form of collaborative city leadership.

[Page 15]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
• Bristol’s food history was marked by significant family businesses such as Fry’s chocolate manufacturer, and is now a hub for independent food production and retail, winning silver status as a Sustainable Food city in 20165. 
• Bristol’s cultural history is significant; Bristol Old Vic is the oldest continually-operating theatre in the English speaking world6; and continues to evolve, with world-class 21st century animations and as home to Europe’s largest street art festival, Upfest.
• The tobacco industry was a significant employer in Bristol, with Wills having the largest factory in Europe in 19707. In the 21st century, we are spearheading anti-smoking action, with the first outdoor spaces in the 
UK designated as ‘no smoking’ in 20158. 
• Civil protest around change has always been a feature of life in Bristol, with bridge tolls in 1793 and resident parking charges in 2015 sparking protests.
UNLOCKING THE FUTURE
Bristol is internationally recognised as a city leader in renewable energy and smart city digital innovation. It is also proud of its independent spirit and its sense of creativity and fun. 
This means that there is already a wealth of initiatives across the city challenging “business as usual” thinking with the aim of disrupting patterns to stimulate new (positive) behaviours. These initiatives – being spearheaded by public, private, voluntary and community organisations and individuals – are all important parts of the resilience jigsaw as they provide weak signals of future change. The city now has an opportunity to build on and connect these initiatives to underpin our resilience-building activities.
The development of the 50 year strategy, led by the Chief Resilience Officer (CRO) Sarah Toy has prompted us to think more deeply about what these innovations have in common and what they collectively signal about the future of the city and their potential for scaling up.
City “pattern disrupters” have been identified as already challenging business as usual; these range from the establishment of municipal energy and waste companies to the development of Bristol’s own currency, the Bristol Pound, and from the development of a Bristol approach to citizen sensing to a new approach to river catchment management. Each of these actions either stretch the current system in some way, or operate outside the system entirely. Either way, they are actions that could begin to transform the city’s systems if they are scaled up.
Bristol is internationally recognised as a city leader in renewable energy and smart city digital innovation. It is also proud of its independent spirit and its sense of creativity and fun.

[Page 16]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
OVERVIEW
Throughout the resilience process we have modelled some of the complexity of systems changes by creating an iterative, non-linear or “messy” method, involving: building new relationships (and challenging existing ones), talking about shifting power and engaging in open-space conversations and encouraging non-linear collective inquiry and collaboration.
This also involved mirroring some of the qualities of resilience - striving always to be reflective, inclusive, flexible and integrated.
2. UNDERSTANDING 
RESILIENCE
Agenda Setting
Workshop
February 2014
CRO Resilience
Stragegy
September 2016
Focus Area
Analysis
January - May 2016
Opportunity
Assessment
February - June 2016
Preliminary 
Resilience
Assessment
November 2015
Scope of Work
December 2015
Stakeholder engagement
Throughout the resilience process we have modelled some of the complexity of systems changes by creating a “messy” methodology. 
Figure 3

[Page 17]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY meetings / interviews public events workshops and focus groups
1,600

[Page 18]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
APPROACH
As a Bristol citizen, the CRO felt strongly that everyone should have a stake in the City’s future resilience. The approach taken was to build an open, inclusive process tapping into existing networks and groups wherever possible. 
Bristol already has a highly engaged stakeholder community which has gone from strength to strength during 2015 due to the city’s European Green 
Capital status. It was therefore important to build on this sense of shared priorities and encourage city dialogue throughout the resilience assessment process. Over 1,600 people were engaged in meetings, focus groups, workshops and events.
The aim was to create as many opportunities as possible for strategic partners and stakeholders across the City and region to work together to explore innovative ways in which co-benefits can be delivered through collective inquiry and collaboration.
The stakeholder engagement was complemented by a robust analysis of available data to review our shocks, stresses, strengths and weaknesses, and to understand how the City operates in order to focus efforts to strengthen our resilience and help Bristol to flourish over the coming 50 years.
Bristol already has a highly engaged stakeholder community which has gone from strength to strength during 2015 due to the city’s European Green 
Capital status. 
Shocks relevant to Bristol 
• Disease Outbreak 
• Public Protest/Disorder 
• Terrorist & Malicious Attacks
• Industrial Action 
• Major Infrastructure Failure
• Industrial Accidents, Environmental 
Pollution & Ordnance 
• International Event 
• Transport Accidents 
• Severe Weather (esp. flooding)
• Structural Hazard
Stresses Relevant to Bristol 
• Transport congestion 
• Ageing infrastructure 
• Climate change 
• Environmental degradation 
• Food supply
• Fuel supply
• Water shortages
• Change in political leadership
• Ageing population 
• Health inequality 
• Growing unemployment
• Economic downturn 
• Population growth
• Civil and political unrest
• Anti-microbial resistance
• Devolution

[Page 19]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
A range of more detailed research and analysis of our selected themes and discovery areas was undertaken, in order to improve our understanding of the issues and to uncover potential opportunities and actions that could be addressed through the Resilience strategy. This work was co-ordinated by the CRO, and undertaken by a range of stakeholders in working teams, supported by Arup where appropriate for certain tasks.
Much of this research surfaced opportunities for interventions that could be included in this Resilience strategy. In addition, we also sought input from a range of stakeholders. We applied a multi-criteria analysis to these opportunities, to identify those that would most effectively address 
Bristol’s specific resilience challenges. This evaluation included a high-level assessment against the drivers of resilience as set out in the city Resilience 
Framework, (CRF) that have been considered most significant for Bristol; the critical shocks and stresses that were identified; and the qualities of a resilient city. This was then complemented by our knowledge of Bristol and the activity that was most likely to lead to transformation as a result of being scaled up. 
Agenda setting workshop
H ea lt h & w el lb ei ng
Le ad er sh ip a nd s tr at eg y
E co n o m y & so ci et y
In fr as tr uc tu re & e nv ir o n m e nt
Fo ste rs lon g-t er m pro sp erit y
Em po we rs a b ro ad se cur ity an d j ust ice
Pro mo tes le ad ers hip & en ga ge d c om mu niti es co mm uni cat ion & mo bili ty
En su re s p ubl ic of crit ica l s erv ice s 
Su pp ort s, as set s
Me ets & i nte gra te d p la nn in g
Fo ste rs ec on om ic ra ng e o f s ta ke ho ld ers
En su re s s oci al sta bili ty, eff ec tiv e ma na ge me nt
Pro mo te s c oh esi ve & 
Pr ovi de s r eli ab le he alt h s erv ice s
En su re s c on tin uit y liv eli ho od s & em plo ym en t
Pro vid es & e nh an ce s na tur al an d ma nm ad e ba sic n ee ds
Figure 4
Source: Arup and the 
Rockefeller Foundation, City 
Resilience Framework, 2014

[Page 20]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
3. RESILIENCE 
PARADOXES
Bristol, as an economically developed city with limited exposure to natural shocks, is a city that, in many ways, is thriving. Our resilience challenge is largely felt in underlying stresses and growing global uncertainty, such as our changing climate or health inequalities in the City. Its successes lie in its pioneering and independent spirit and personality. It is a city with vibrant cultures and a high quality of life. We want to use the concept of resilience to help Bristol to flourish today as well as in the future. 
Our work has identified five key paradoxes that articulate Bristol’s challenges at different city scales – from the individual/community to the regional and global context. These five paradoxes are derived from our analysis of the shocks and stresses that threaten Bristol’s resilience.
PEOPLE
Communities are diverse, but inequality threatens cohesion
Bristol’s population is diverse, with 45 religions, 91 languages and 187 places of birth. This diversity, which is set to increase over the coming decades, is part of what makes the city a vibrant place to live. At present, we largely co-exist respectfully and peacefully but inequality between different communities and neighbourhoods compromises social cohesion. The root causes of inequality, coupled with the challenge of a rapidly ageing population (there will be 120% more people aged over 90 in Bristol by 
2039), need to be tackled to ensure that in the future the city is made up of socially cohesive communities with all individuals having the assets and capacity to thrive.
ORGANISATIONS
Civic society is engaged, but not connected
Many parts of the City are already highly engaged in working collaboratively to plan the future of the City, from grassroots activists to academia, from third sector bodies to City Council teams, from youth councils to partnership bodies, but this enthusiasm to cooperate is not always harnessed. Power is still perceived to lie, in top-down, siloed systems that operate in short-term political cycles. There are also many citizens who feel disconnected or unable to influence the future of the 
City or the wider City Region. The interests, aspirations and actions of citizens and civic society must be better connected to the City’s formal planning, decision-making processes and delivery mechanisms to create a truly participatory future city.
PLACES
Built environment is ‘greened’ but not yet transformed
Bristol is seen as a ‘green’ city, having been the first UK city to hold the title of European Green Capital in 2015. 
Ambitious public commitments have been made to be zero carbon by 
2050. However, we know that more audacious, bolder steps are needed to transform the built environment and people’s behaviours. We also know that increasing uncertainty, particularly in relation to a changing climate, means that we need to adapt to future uncertainty and risk. 
Managing stresses such as transport congestion and ageing infrastructure is an important part of this challenge. 
Radical solutions, coupled with new forms of financing, must be secured to transform Bristol into an attractive and prosperous post-carbon city.
Our work has identified five key paradoxes that articulate Bristol’s challenges at different city scales – from the individual/community to the regional and global context.

[Page 21]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
Re gio nal to G lo ba l
Pr os pe rit y an d 
W or th
Or ga ni sa ti on s
Pl ac es
P e o p l e
PROSPERITY AND WORTH
The city is economically successful, but not equally flourishing
Bristol’s success is measured in economic terms by Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP)/Gross Value Added (GVA) and is regarded as a highly productive net contributor to the national economy. It is also home to a higher number of creative industry start-ups than any other UK core city, as well as having the highest number of patent registrations. 
This is despite significant differences in health, income and access to opportunities between different communities and neighbourhoods. The gap between communities needs must be closed so that decent opportunities are accessible to everyone. Housing affordability is an increasingly important issue for the City. 
Bristol is also increasingly recognised as a leader in next economy ‘pattern disruptions’ such as the Bristol Pound and Happy City and there is a strong movement to place more importance on the wider concept of flourishing but there are currently no city-scale metrics to truly value – and therefore aim towards - non-economic outcomes.
REGIONAL TO GLOBAL
The city is focused on strengthening local self-sufficiency but continues to be dependent on national and global systems
Many of Bristol’s innovative projects and pattern disrupters are focused on promoting self-sufficiency and circularity of systems – for example encouraging local consumption and production with the Bristol Pound or reducing our carbon footprint and waste streams. 
However, this needs to be finely balanced with the need to continue to benefit from national and international systems and infrastructure that provide some of the basic services we need to function well in times of prosperity, as well as in times of stress. These range from our energy infrastructure, to the global food market and location of global corporations in Bristol. This national and global interdependency can also make us vulnerable to a range of external shocks that we have little control over locally.

[Page 22]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
4. FRAMING OUR FUTURE
OUR VISION 
This sets out our long-term direction of travel. It reflects the need for change at all scales: stating with individual citizens, through local communities and neighbourhoods, to the city as a whole and its place in the wider world. 
By 2066 Bristol is a flourishing, welcoming city which inspires confidence in local and global investors, and our success is shared by all. Our neighbourhoods are affordable, attractive, healthy and well-connected places where people of all ages and backgrounds trust and help each other. Our infrastructure and services are flexibly designed and managed to cope with uncertainty. 
Five pillars have been developed to describe the outcomes that we can hope to achieve over the course of the coming decades, in support of this vision. 
These five pillars are supported by goals over the next 50 years, demonstrating the direction of travel for the city.
Responding to each of the five paradoxes set out in section 3 will help us to move towards achieving these ambitious outcomes for Bristol.
A range of innovative and disruptive actions have been developed to support this vision, pillars and goals as detailed in the next section.
By 2066 Bristol is a flourishing, welcoming city which inspires confidence in local and global investors, and our success is shared by all.

[Page 23]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
Fair
Every person living in Bristol has the assets and opportunities to enjoy a good quality of life. 
Goals, by 2066 Bristolians will: 
• Be free from discriminatory practices
• Be providing opportunities for all to close the education gap
• Provide affordable housing for all
• Be free from child poverty
• Be free from health inequality
• Deliver a fair income ratio in the city between highest and lowest incomes
Addressing the resilience paradoxes: Achieving greater equality and social cohesion are crucial to increasing Bristol’s resilience; providing affordable and quality access to opportunity, as well as to energy, water, food and shelter being the starting point for a resilient place. 
Flourishing 
Resilient City
Fair
Every person living in Bristol has the assets and opportunities to enjoy a good quality of life.
Liveable
The city centre and neighbourhoods are great places for people of all ages to live, work, learn and play.
Sustainable
The city and region prosper within environmental limits through adopting new behaviours and technology.
Agile
Bristol citizens and leaders make agile decisions based on shared priorities and real-time information.
Connected
A strong network of local communities and organisations promotes trust, cooperation and shared action across the city.

[Page 24]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
Liveable
The city centre and neighbourhoods are great places for people of all ages to live, work, learn and play. 
Goals, by 2066 Bristolians will: 
• Benefit, across the whole city, from the multi-functional value of green infrastructure and the natural environment
• Live in an age-friendly city, with all ages able to access all necessary services within a 20 minute journey by a sustainable mode of transport
• Achieve clean air for Bristol
Addressing the resilience paradoxes: Green infrastructure and the natural environment can provide multiple benefits such as active travel, improved air quality, improved health and wellbeing, and reduced impacts of flooding, climate change, and environmental degradation, and reduced transport costs. 
Sustainable
The city and region prosper within environmental limits through adopting new behaviours and technology.
Goals, by 2066 Bristolians will: 
• Develop a zero waste city
• Live in a carbon neutral city 
• Operate environmentally responsible and fairtrade supply chains
Addressing the resilience paradoxes: To live within our environmental limits we will aim to use resources (products, components and materials) to their highest utility in the economy. This builds resilience by reducing the impact of resource scarcity (e.g. energy, food, water, materials), future-proofing our infrastructure and our economy, and protecting our natural environment.

[Page 25]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
Agile
Bristol citizens and leaders make effective decisions based on shared priorities and real time information. 
Goals, by 2066 Bristolians will: 
• Be using city data to reduce inequality
• Develop new partnerships to co-create and scale up city solutions
• Deliver local bonds and place-based investment to transform the city
Addressing the resilience paradoxes: Being more agile will help to futureproof Bristol’s infrastructure and wider assets, whilst also promoting longterm resilience planning rather than just short-term financial returns. It will also help to deliver jobs and skills for local people, whilst empowering citizens to support projects they are passionate about, and providing key infrastructure assets for Bristol.
Connected
A strong network of local communities promotes trust, cooperation and shared action across the city.
Goals, by 2066 Bristolians will: 
• Be living by a city charter for shared values
• Benefit from city-wide community cohesion
• Design and deliver services by self-organised communities
Addressing the resilience paradoxes: By implementing actions related to this pillar, we aim to develop a participatory culture, by undertaking projects that appeal to those across a community with tangible outcomes, where participants contribute and benefit equally.

[Page 26]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
Liv ea ble
Reg ion al t o g lob al
Pro sp eri ty an d w ort h
Or ga ni sat io ns
Pl a ce
P e o p le
Ag ile
Co nn ect ed
Fai r
Su stai na ble
13, 12
41, 37, 35
32, 31, 29
24, 21
17, 16, 15
5, 3
27, 26
10, 9
8, 1
40, 33
23, 20
39, 38
18, 14
7, 6
5. REIMAGINING 
THE CITY
We know that in order to be resilient over the next 50 years, we will need be reflective, and able to learn and adapt over time. We also know that Bristol is defined by its pioneering attitude, willingness to experiment and lead with engagement from a wide range of partners. 
This section sets out a collection of some – but by no means all – of the pattern disrupters that will challenge business as usual in the city to put us on a more resilient trajectory for the future. We are committed to delivering, catalysing or scaling these in the short to medium term. 
The diagram above serves to signpost the actions contained within the remainder of the document.
Short-term = 1-2 years
Medium-term = 2-5 years
Long-term = 5 years+

[Page 28]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
Tackling street homelessness
Bristol is experiencing a rise in homelessness with the city having a significant gap between demand and supply of suitable accommodation for homeless people and families. The aim is to eliminate or significantly reduce involuntary rough sleeping in 
Bristol within 12 months, whilst ensuring that the quality of accommodation provided is of a suitable standard.
Bristol’s new city Office will develop a strategic plan in the coming months, aimed at increasing the supply of accommodation at all levels, which is appropriate to immediate needs, and also considers longer term housing.
Delivery
• Potential partners: Bristol City Council (Housing led), University of the West of 
England, University of Bristol, Registered Social Landlords, Developers, Bristol 
Housing Board, West of England authorities, Crisis Centre Ministries, Bristol & 
Bath Regional Capital CIC
• Timescale: Short – medium-term
Cultural engagement to build social cohesion
While Bristol is seen as a place where the arts are thriving the experience of arts and culture is not equitable or accessible for many of Bristol’s citizens and often does not reflect the cultural ecology and diversity of the city.
“Migrant Dialogues”, created by Mescaldis and undertaken in Barcelona, takes an art-led approach to build social cohesion, strengthen community networks, create space for dialogue about diversity and migration and promote intergenerational conversations. 
The next step is for Bristol stakeholders from the Council’s crime prevention and equalities teams to work with Mescaldis to identify an appropriate neighbourhood and local partners and funders to deliver an initiative in Bristol to build a dialogue about immigration, diversity and neighbourliness.
Delivery
• Potential partners: Mescaldis, BCC Crime Prevention and Equalities, Community 
Theatre Company, Watershed, Pervasive Media Studio, Playable city, Bristol 
Cultural Development Partnership, Ujima
• Timescale: Short-term
PEOPLE
Fair
Fair
Liveable
Liveable
Sustainable
Sustainable
Agile
Agile
Connected
Connected

[Page 29]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
Votes for 
16 year olds
While Bristol has an active youth council and 16 and 17 year olds across the city hold many responsibilities in society, they do not have a change to influence key decisions which will define their future. Extending votes for 16 year olds will provide 16 and 17 year olds with the chance to be involved in democracy and ensure youth issues are represented.
This will follow the precedent set by the Scottish Elections (Reduction of Voting 
Age) Act, May 2016, which allows 16 and 17 year olds to vote in Scottish Parliament elections and local government elections. 
In Bristol, this would mean asking for the devolved responsibility to allow 16 and 17 year olds to vote in local elections.
Delivery 
• Potential partners: Bristol City Council, Votes at 16 Coalition
• Timescales: Long-term
Social action volunteering
Following an initial two-year set up period, funded by Cabinet Office and supported by Nesta and Bloomberg Philanthropies, Bristol and partner cities will develop the role of the active citizen in the ‘life’ of the city. 
Over the next two years the team will aim to work with the private, voluntary and community sectors as well as other parts of the public sector to create a whole city approach to addressing key city challenges through social action. Some of the projects that will be scaled up include:
Volunteer platform – Creates easy access to information from many sites of volunteering opportunities.
Employer Supported Volunteering (ESV) – BCC is updating its staff volunteering policy and working with other employers to implement this. National Citizens Service (NCS) – Bristol to become a pilot for the new NCS scheme, with a focus on cultural and media sectors for young people.
Delivery
• Potential partners: Bristol City Council, NCS Trust, Office for Civil Society (OCS), 
Voluntary & Community Sector
• Timescale: Short – medium-term
PEOPLE
Fair
Fair
Liveable
Liveable
Sustainable
Sustainable
Agile
Agile
Connected
Connected

[Page 30]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
Participatory city
The Participatory City is a global initiative empowering local people to invent unique and innovative projects, which see them working together on ideas which make their neighbourhoods more exciting and enjoyable places to live. 
A large demonstration neighbourhood is being built in London starting in early 
2017. It is intended that this neighbourhood will become a model for wellbeing, sustainability and equality. 
Key to the success of the project will be the ability of the neighbourhood to collaborate widely to bring many fresh ideas together in an open source environment. Bristol could host a similar project to bring the ideas from The 
Participatory City to the city.
Delivery
• Potential partners: Bristol City Council, Demonstration Neighbourhood
• Timescale: Medium-term
Citizen data engagement
We will leverage data to find solutions to city issues, using existing and near-term initiatives such as REPLICATE. We will build the capacity of organisations and citizens to use data to shape projects and achieve ‘smart’ city outcomes. 
REPLICATE (REnaissance of Places with Innovative Citizenship And Technologies) is a ¤25 million Smart city ‘Lighthouse’ project. In Bristol, it is employing digital technology to explore the impact of integrating smart energy and smart transport interventions in the neighbourhood of Easton. Bristol is a city within the URBACT 
Resilient Europe network which aims to share experiences on resilience and sustainability across the network. Bringing these two projects together will enable 
Bristol to develop a real neighbourhood focus to data engagement.
Delivery
• Potential partners: University of Bristol, Bristol City Council, Knowle West Media 
Centre, Learning city. 
• Timescale: Medium-term
PEOPLE
Fair
Fair
Liveable
Liveable
Sustainable
Sustainable
Agile
Agile
Connected
Connected

[Page 31]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
Green and black
Inclusiveness and environmental awareness are key concerns for Bristol now and in the future. The Green and Black initiative aims to kickstart a long term series of activities and relationships with Black and Minority Ethnic (BAME) communities around the legacy of the European Green Capital year. 
This action will focus on developing young BAME ambassadors to raise environmental awareness in their communities and more broadly around the city. It is intended that the programme will engage the ‘future city’ academics at the universities and act as a catalyst for one or more corollary projects in both the Impact and Research agendas. 
One larger scale project is hoped to emerge that the partners can take to an external funder (e.g. Esmée Fairbairn) for support.
Delivery
• Potential partners: Bristol Green Capital Partnership, Ujima, University of Bristol, 
Bristol City Council, Social Intelligence Institute
• Timescale: Medium-term
Community-based adaptation
Communities that are self-organised in day to day life are inherently better prepared to respond to, and recover from, unexpected events in their neighbourhoods. 
Community based adaptation (CBA) has been pioneered in developing countries to build capacity in vulnerable and marginalised communities to become more resilient to climate change impacts. An important lesson from CBA practices is that a multilevel, cross-sectoral approach involving a range of different stakeholders - including the residents themselves - is necessary to develop adaptive capacity and build long term resilience.
This action builds on the principles of CBA and experience from a number of existing projects and initiatives in Bristol, the south west and other cities around the world. It aims to develop a more integrated and inclusive approach to working with communities to empower them with the knowledge, confidence and resources to take action when affected by local shocks.
Delivery
• Potential partners: Bristol City Council Civil Protection Unit, Cities of Service team, Local Resilience Forum, Groundwork (funded by Big Lottery Fund), 
Bristol Resilience Network, Community Development teams, UL Cabinet Office.
• Timescale: Short-term
PEOPLE
Fair
Fair
Liveable
Liveable
Sustainable
Sustainable
Agile
Agile
Connected
Connected

[Page 32]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
PEOPLE
PLACE

[Page 33]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY ©iStock
New models of housing delivery
Free bus travel for under 16s
Bristol is facing a housing crisis. Yet decent affordable homes are the foundation of a successful city. The Mayor has pledged to deliver 2,000 new homes (800 affordable) per year by 2020. This will be achieved by setting up a Local Housing Company. This 
Company will have a remit to promote use of brownfield sites across the city for housing, work with local communities and support the development of alternative housing initiatives such as co-housing and communal living that aim to tackle wider social challenges such as social isolation and community cohesion. Affordability will be addressed through reduced running costs of sustainable homes.
Delivery
• Potential partners: Bristol City Council (Housing led), University of West of 
England, University of Bristol, Registered Social Landlords, Bristol Housing 
Board, West of England authorities, local builders, Community Land Trusts, 
Bristol and Bath Regional Capital CiC, developers and investors (e.g. Meridiam)
• Timescale: Short – medium-term
Currently there is free bus travel in Bristol only for children under 5, with half price tickets for those ages 5-15. Those aged 16 and under can receive a free bus pass, for free school travel from the Council if they go to their nearest school and meet certain distance or safety eligibility criteria. Extending this free service to all under 16s will promote bus use and may help to reduce school time congestion. Lessons can be learnt from Transport for London who provide this on all on their bus and tram services.
Delivery 
• Potential partners: First Group, Bristol City Council 
• Timescale: Short – medium-term
Learning from elsewhere – Housing for a Resilient New Orleans
To combat new city trends, such as a 50% increase in cost of rental since 2000, Housing for a Resilient New Orleans has created an integrated housing framework. This uses the strength of a growing local economy and creates a new approach to providing affordable housing choice for residents. 
It creates new policies and tools to address new and long-standing challenges so everyone can participate in the city’s growing prosperity. This guided by three core principles: equity, collaboration and openness.
This will support development of new affordable rental and homeownership opportunities, preserve affordability, expand access to opportunity using the fair housing principle, and increase accessibility for vulnerable populations. 
PLACE
Fair
Fair
Liveable
Liveable
Sustainable
Sustainable
Agile
Agile
Connected
Connected

[Page 34]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
Learning from elsewhere – Portland, Oregon
In 2005, the City of Portland engaged community members in a comprehensive review and assessment of Portland’s 35-year-old neighbourhood and community involvement system. The result was a unique, comprehensive and strategic “Five-year Plan to Increase 
Community Involvement in Portland.” The ongoing implementation of this plan by the City of Portland and its community partners is dramatically increasing the scope and quality of public involvement and participatory democracy in Portland. 
As part of this, a new Neighbourhood Small Grants program was created. Additional community organizing and technical assistance staff were added to the Office of 
Neighbourhood Involvement to work with community groups and city agencies.
[source: http://participedia.net/en/cases/five-year-plan-increase-community-involvementportland-oregon]
Repurpose neighbourhood partnerships
Local scale funding can help local communities to increase social cohesion and build local capacity. Through the Avonmouth Community Resilience Fund, Bristol is trialling a new approach, with a focus on local priorities of jobs and employment, a flourishing high street and social impact. 
Bristol is also involved in an EU project, URBACT, which will inform new possible models for improving neighbourhood-level resilience.
Neighbourhood Partnerships are designed to allow decision-making to have an impact at a local level. Through a new approach, they can become truly representative and help to channel funding to new local research-backed initiatives, systems, and policy changes that help provide an inclusive approach to improving resilience.
Delivery
• Potential partners: Bristol City Council, Neighbourhood Partnerships
• Timescale: Medium-term
PLACE
The ongoing implementation of this plan by the City of Portland and its community partners is dramatically increasing the scope and quality of public involvement and participatory democracy in Portland.
Fair
Liveable
Sustainable
Agile
Connected

[Page 35]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
Bristol Transport 
Plan
This action will promote the development of a 20 year plan to create better places and help people move around by enabling a large scale shift to sustainable transport in Bristol. We currently have plans to deliver new transport infrastructure within the current funding and planning cycles, this strategy will enable us to look further ahead and to test more radical interventions to reduce congestion, carbon emissions and ensure infrastructure is resilient to climate change.
To support the development of this strategy, using MIT (Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology) Smart’s SimMobility Platform, we will quantify the impact of different transport options. We will use 50 year scenarios to support strategy development, and will ensure other transport strategy refresh projects are integrated with this longer-term view.
Delivery
• Potential city partners: Bristol City Council (Transport); Network Rail, West of 
England Authorities, Sustrans; First Group; Bristol Ageing Better; Child Friendly 
City; University of the West of England
• Potential platform partners: MIT Smart, EY
• Timescale: Medium-term
Legible city
Bristol Legible City (BLC) is an innovative project started 20 years ago as a unique concept to improve people’s understanding and experience of the city through the use of identity, information and transportation projects.
The project has recently agreed funding for the next initiative which is to develop innovative city mapping and information resources to support change to more sustainable forms of transport and encourage active travel choices. The initiative will deliver a suite of digital, printed and street-based information products to encourage residents and visitors to explore the city on foot, bike and using the public transport system. BLC’s user-centred approach to wayfinding and transport information has been developed to support better public health and reduce greenhouse gas production.
The initiative will deliver an enhanced pedestrian wayfinding system across the city and develop new user-friendly information for the cycle network, the MetroBus project and the wider public transport system.
Delivery
• Potential partners: BCC, Legible City, MetroBus, Platform Partners
• Timescale: Short – medium-term
Resilience value
Improved way-finding and real time information has shown to increase uptake of sustainable travel behaviours and will create a city which is both better connected more liveable for citizens and attractive for visitors.
PLACE
Fair
Fair
Liveable
Liveable
Sustainable
Sustainable
Agile
Agile
Connected
Connected

[Page 36]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
Climate change adaptation plan
Clean air city
As a signatory of the Compact of Mayors, Bristol has a long-established approach to climate change mitigation (see action R4). This action will build on this success and develop an approach to adaptation to climate change. 
A plan will be developed to future-proof the city by identifying the major climate hazards and their potential impact, a framework for adaptation, and identification of strategies to build climate resilience. Consideration of the issues will be required at a city scale with actions targeted at a local scale with their benefits well communicated. 
Delivery
• Potential partners: Bristol City Council
• Timescales: Short-term
Bristol is part of an EU funded consortium of universities and research institutions to actively engage European citizens in measuring their personal impact on air quality and CO2 emissions in their cities. The project will use innovative tools like specially made apps and games for smart phones to generate citizen-led policies to improve air-related health in our cities.
Thousands of people across Europe will be invited to share their views on how to reduce air pollution and improve related public health in six pilot cities. Residents will use a game on their smartphones, tablets and laptops to suggest how their home cities should develop in the future. The result will be directly translated in improved city policies.
In Bristol we will focus on raising awareness about poor air quality and work with citizens to identify simple actions that can improve air quality in their local streets.
Delivery
• Potential partners: University of West of England, BCC Sustainable City Team
• Timescale: Medium-term
PLACE
Fair
Fair
Liveable
Liveable
Sustainable
Sustainable
Agile
Agile
Connected
Connected

[Page 37]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
Establishing a resilient city financing structure
Bristol will explore options for establishing a Resilient city financing structure by aggregating a suite of small and large scale place-based projects focusing on improving local resilience (e.g. flood defences, green infrastructure, community facilities and new housing). The structure would seek to blend public and private money and take a long term view (at least 25 years) to achieve a social as well as a financial return on investment. 
Delivery
• Potential partners: Bristol City Council (Economic Development) Bristol Energy and Waste Companies, Bristol & Bath Regional Capital Community interest 
Company, University of Bristol, University of West of England, Meridiam, Ernst and Young, Microfinance Opportunities, Social Finance, Transform Finance. 
• Timescale: Medium-term
PLACE
Fair
Liveable
Sustainable
Agile
Connected

[Page 38]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
Manage our future flood risk
Tidal flooding from the River Avon has the potential to cause severe damage to the city centre. Bristol’s Central Area Flood Risk Assessment (CAFRA) predicts that the current trend of rising sea levels will accelerate due to the impact of climate change, causing the likelihood of tidal flooding in central Bristol8. 
A strategy is being developed to recommend an adaptive programme, identify when flood risk management interventions are needed and examine how they will be funded.
Delivery
• Potential partners: Bristol City Council Flood team, Environment Agency, Local 
Enterprise Partnership
• Timescale: Medium-term
Wild rainwater streets
Greening local neighbourhoods helps to make our City more liveable, whilst also improving local biodiversity, enhancing sustainable drainage, and reducing the urban heat island effect and improve the city’s resilience to climate change. Bristol will build on existing initiatives, including Avon Wildlife’s Trust’s My Wild Street, Wessex Water’s 
Rainwater City, and Embleton Road SuDs, to develop an approach that communities across the city can engage in. 
Delivery
• Potential partners: Bristol Green Capital Partnership, Bristol City Council, Avon 
Wildlife Trust, Wessex Water, Sustrans
• Timescale: Medium-term
Learning from elsewhere – Metropolitan Urban Forest Strategy, Melbourne
During the Millennium Drought (1998-2007) many of Melbourne’s trees were in a critical state, so work had to be undertaken to replant and protect them. Since 2012, 12,000 new trees have been planted. The Urban Forest Visual project developed a map of 70,000 of the City’s trees. It provides data on the life expectancy, species of tree and the option to ‘email the tree’. 
The aim was that residents could know more about the city’s trees, their importance and email reports to the Council on the state of the trees. Instead, people used this as a chance to write love letters to trees. To date, 3000 emails to trees have been received from all over the world.
[http://melbourneurbanforestvisual.com.au/#abo]
PLACE
Fair
Fair
Liveable
Liveable
Sustainable
Sustainable
Agile
Agile
Connected
Connected

[Page 40]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
Equality charter
Inequality, lack of social mobility and exclusion from the economic, social, cultural and political spheres are among the key challenges facing Bristol’s communities. A range of race equalities groups came together in 2015 to develop a Bristol Manifesto for Race Equality. This manifesto sets out a clear declaration of values, vision, and intentions for the city’s communities, a call for action, and a timeline. The Manifesto highlights key areas where racial inequalities persist and where the gaps are widening (retain footnote 11).
The City Council now plans to build on this work by developing an Equality Charter which will apply to the Council and any organisation that the council commissions, grants aid to or procures services from, to include governance, administration and delivery. The council is also committed to addressing the underlying issues facing 
Bristol in attracting BME candidates for senior positions within the Council.
Delivery
• Potential partners: Bristol City Council (equalities team), Voscur, Avon and 
Somerset Black Police Association, SARI, Black South West Network, Building the Bridge, Nilaari, Ujima Radio and Somali Media Group.
• Timescale: Short-term
Resilience Value
The persistent inequalities in the City, particularly associated with race, are a negative force in our social connectivity and our economy which threaten our long term resilience. By addressing these issues with focused action we can build a fairer, more cohesive, and therefore resilient future for all Bristol’s residents.
ORGANISATIONS
Fair
Liveable
Sustainable
Agile
Connected

[Page 41]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
City knowledge exchange platform
We will explore a range of options for developing an open knowledge platform for connecting people, organisations, ideas and knowledge across the city. It would enable ideas to be connected across themes such as climate preparedness and could connect project ideas with possible funders.
Delivery
• Potential partners: 2Degrees, Bristol City Council, Bristol Green Capital 
Partnership, Private Sector sponsors. Potential platform partners: Your Priorities
• Timescale: Long-term
ORGANISATIONS
Fair
Liveable
Sustainable
Agile
Connected
City Office partnership working
The Mayor is committed to setting up a new City Office to tackle cross-cutting, complex issues through a shared approach to strategic leadership with the ability to deliver tangible outcomes through targeted projects. It will aim to help collective actions, help to remove barriers to change and connect with new people in new ways.
The City Office will provide a strong focus and coordination role for the excellent partnership working that is already well-developed in the City. For example, it will work closely with existing groups such as the Bristol Green Capital Partnership (BGCP) which is an independent leadership organisation founded in 2007. It has more than 850 member organisations, ranging from businesses and the public sector to charities & community organisations. It is currently working on a range of projects towards its vision of ‘a sustainable city with a high quality of life for all’.
Delivery
• Potential partners: City leaders (from politics, business, community, public/ managerial professional, unions), existing City Partnerships 
• Timescale: Short to long term
Resilience Value
In order to address the complex challenges of building long term resilience and to make sure we leverage the social and environmental as well as the economic benefits of focusing on resilience we need to connect across city organisations and sectors. 
We also need to reach out and connect to the city’s diverse communities. The City 
Office will provide leadership, direction and coordination at a city-scale to harness the potential and deliver on the right priorities to ensure the city is resilient and can prosper in the face of change.
Fair
Liveable
Sustainable
Agile
Connected

[Page 42]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
Family friendly city
Despite 25% of the city being made up of those aged 18 or under their views are often neglected. A Family Friendly City conference will investigate what constitutes a family friendly city and will highlight the rights and needs of children and young people as active Bristol citizens and vital city assets. This will include people from a wide range of backgrounds, including UNICEF, small local organisations, as well as the opinions of the youth council and younger children.
Delivery
• Potential partners: UNICEF, Room 13, Architecture Centre, Playing Out, 
University of Bristol.
• Timescale: Short-term
ORGANISATIONS
Fair
Liveable
Sustainable
Agile
Connected

[Page 43]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
Transformative Leadership
Transformative Leadership is a practical leadership framework that helps individuals and organisations adapt and thrive in challenging environments. It describes the ability to take on the gradual but meaningful process of change, both individually and collectively. The food system, with elements including growing, processing, logistics, distribution, selling, buying, cooking and eating, is complex. In order to drive change to address the long-term stress of food security and develop more resilient approaches, new leadership and skills will be required. The food sector therefore provides an excellent sector in which to pilot this approach. This project will develop and test approaches to delivering this including U-Theory which has already attracted much attention and hundreds of participants in Bristol.
Delivery
• Potential partners: Bristol City Council, Food Policy Council, Bristol Green 
Capital Partnership. MIT U-Theory (Massive Open On-line Course), Transition 
Bristol
• Timescale: Short-term
SevernNet circular economy plan
SevernNet is a not-for-profit enterprise bringing together businesses and community enterprises in the industrial areas of Portbury, Avonmouth and Severnside to the north-west of Bristol city centre. SevernNet has developed, with bottom up and top down input from stakeholders across the area, an Economic Plan for the area with five key themes. These are Place and Connection, Transport, Skills, Enterprise and 
Circular Economy.
SevernNet already has the cooperation of 10 key businesses in the areas to start developing initiatives to:
Identify and support opportunities for linkages (e.g. into existing or new businesses and enterprises) and minimising / eliminating waste (complementary to supply chain enterprise initiatives), new models of enterprise; business redesign and renewable energy sources; and
Promoting and supporting opportunities to develop the local sharing economy e.g. tool shares, repair clubs, clothes swaps.
Delivery 
• Potential Partners: SevernNet
• Timescale: Medium – long-term
ORGANISATIONS
Fair
Fair
Liveable
Liveable
Sustainable
Sustainable
Agile
Agile
Connected
Connected

[Page 44]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
PROSPERITY 
AND WORTH

[Page 45]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
Varied and frequent experience of work
The Learning City Partnership Board, supported by the Mayor’s City Office, is leading the delivery of more varied and frequent experience of work for all young people in the city. The newly created WORKS is the development of a physical and virtual ‘Engagement Hub’ to bring businesses, education providers and young people together. The aim is to provide career related activities and work placements that will raise aspirations and secure successful career pathways for all, with an accompanying e-portfolio to record young peoples’ experience. 
Many young people do not have the personal networks to gain varied and regular experience of the world of work, particularly those who are more vulnerable, such as in the care system, and those living in more deprived parts of the city. This lack of experience has a direct impact on young peoples’ employability and in turn the development of the local workforce. 
A focus on experience of work will galvanize the collective endeavour, building on best practice, of the city’s education providers and local employers. Successful local programmes, such as HYPE West, will help to ensure those young people furthest from the labour market are supported into employment. Digital technology solutions to communicate with and engage young people, like Skills Bridge which connects university students with the community projects, will be developed in partnership with the sector. 
Delivery
• Potential partners: Learning City Partnership, City Office, City employers and education providers, Bristol City Youth Council.
• Timescale: Short to medium term
Resilience Value
By improving employability prospects for young people in Bristol we are building the workforce of the future to ensure that the city can respond agilely to the changing job market. The focus on increasing access for poorer or vulnerable young people will build resilience into our social system and ensure the city becomes a fairer and more prosperous place for everyone.
PROSPERITY AND WORTH
Fair
Liveable
Sustainable
Agile
Connected

[Page 46]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
PROSPERITY AND WORTH
City metrics and Sustainable 
Development Goals
We will develop a new set of high level city metrics for all stakeholders to aim towards a fairer, happier and more sustainable city. This will help us move away from relying solely on Gross Domestic Product (GDP) - a high level economic growth indicator - as the headline measure of our success. 
The work already done by Bristol-based Happy City Initiative, along with the 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), provide useful frameworks and tools for developing a new, inclusive set of Bristol metrics. These need to be developed and agreed with a wide range of city partners so that they can then be used as the basis for designing and evaluating future city policies and programmes across different organisations and policy areas. They can also be used to raise public awareness and as a mechanism to anchor the city’s international engagement.
Delivery
• Potential partners: Happy City, Bristol SDG Alliance, Bristol City Council (Intelligence, Policy, International, Open data), Bristol Green Capital Partnership; 
Common Good; Health and Wellbeing Board; Local Enterprise Partnership; 
Local Nature Partnership, Black Network South West
• Timescale: short term (awareness- raising) and medium term (implementation)
Resilience Value
A set of metrics that measures city progress against parameters such as wellbeing, and inclusion alongside traditional economic indicators will help us move towards fairer and more sustainable future growth across the city and region.
Fair
Liveable
Sustainable
Agile
Connected

[Page 47]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
Engine Shed 2
The Engine Shed is a venue designed to host a hub of activity where entrepreneurs, business leaders, academics, students and corporates can collaborate. It is recognised as a prominent, active, innovative and provocative environment dedicated to promoting sustainable economic growth in collaboration with a number of significant partners. 
The intention is to build upon the success of the first phase of the Engine Shed to implement the Engine Shed Phase 2 (ES2). This will be embedded in the existing facility and aims to build something more powerful and sustainable. It will provide more floor space for business incubation, business growth and space for meetings, collaboration, teaching, exhibition, display and discussion13. 
Delivery
• Potential partners: University of Bristol, Bristol City Council 
• Timescale: Short-term
Protecting and 
Valuing green space
We will develop a high level assessment of the financial value of green spaces across the city to assist with future investment decisions. A valuation analysis of the natural capital in Bristol’s parks will be conducted, which includes certified values of each ecosystem service. There is a lack of sustainable funding for green infrastructure. This assessment will provide an evidence base to support increased uptake and delivery of green infrastructure projects, both improvements to existing green space and delivery of new projects.
Delivery
• Potential partners: Bristol City Council (Parks and Environment), Avon Wildlife 
Trust, Local Nature Partnership, Natural Capital Trust, Bristol & Bath Regional 
Capital CiC, Earth Economics, The Nature Conservancy, Arcadis
• Timescale: Medium-term
PROSPERITY AND WORTH
Fair
Liveable
Sustainable
Agile
Connected
Fair
Liveable
Sustainable
Agile
Connected

[Page 48]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
Active and healthy ageing
The ageing population is a challenge for the future of the city. We need to support older people to remain independent and active as citizens and within the economy as long as possible so allowing them to live more fulfilling lives as well as reducing the impact on public spending and public services. We make sure Bristol is a good place for people to grow old. We also need to explore and develop new ways of providing the support that older people will need.
One such innovation in development is the plan to create a supportive mechanism for older people (over 55) to continue in, or re-enter, the job market. This may take the form of a bespoke older people’s employment agency offering opportunities to have internships working with partner organisations and companies.
Delivery partners
• Anchor Society, Business in the Community, University of West of England, 
Bristol City Council (Policy, Planning, Adult Social Care), Bristol Ageing Better, 
Age UK, Older People’s Forum, Business West, West of England Enterprise 
Partnership.
• Timescale: Short to long term.
Young Future 
Bristol
The young people of Bristol need to be equipped with digital skills today to make sure they are not excluded from accessing the growing future jobs market in the region’s digital and high tech sector. The school curriculum is not equipping pupils with these skills and most children from less privileged families do not have opportunities to gain these skills outside of the school setting. Young Future Bristol has been set up to target this future skills gap and build a new generation of coders and technologists and internationally to support the delivery of a technology engagement programme for young people. They provide the “kit” (laptops and 
Raspberry Pis) and technical expertise and guidance to help young people develop digital skills for the future workplace.
Delivery
• Potential partners: Digilocal - led by High Tech Bristol and Bath with sponsorship from local businesses, CodeClub and DigiLocal clubs, Knowle West 
Media Centre, Bristol City Council Cities of Service team
• Timescale: Short – medium-term
PROSPERITY AND WORTH
Fair
Fair
Liveable
Liveable
Sustainable
Sustainable
Agile
Agile
Connected
Connected

[Page 49]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
Natural Capital Trust
We will support the development of the Natural Capital Trust (NCT) as an innovative mechanism to deliver enhancement in the quality of the natural environment across the West of England region. The NCT will act as a conduit of funds from developers, and from potential beneficiaries of Payments for Ecosystem Services schemes, to support a range of projects which ensure provision of services by ecosystems, enhancing (amongst other things) resilience to the effects of climate change and of the region’s infrastructure. 
Delivery
• Potential partners: Bristol City Council (and other UAs in the region); West of 
England Nature Partnership; Health and Wellbeing Board; Local Enterprise 
Partnership; utility providers; developers; English Nature; Environment Agency; 
Highways Agency.
• Timescale: Medium-term
Fair
Liveable
Sustainable
Agile
Connected
Open data platform
Bristol City Council’s Open Data goal is to unlock value for the Council, citizens and businesses by sharing Bristol’s data to address city challenges, promote innovation and make the city more open and accountable. The council already shared over 130 data sets on its Open Data Platform but in order to extend reach and impact the council is currently developing its open data ecosystem to make it easy a possible for employees, external organisations and citizens to interact with data. 
The Council also understands that publishing and encouraging access, use and reuse of data is only a part of the process, and is therefore committed to an ongoing community engagement programme. Current engagement activity includes, but is not limited to, an open data challenge series and support in the delivery of ‘The Bristol 
Approach to Citizen Sensing’ with Knowle West Media Centre.
Delivery
• Potential partners: BCC, Knowle West Media Centre
• Timescales: Short-term
Fair
Liveable
Sustainable
Agile
Connected
PROSPERITY AND WORTH

[Page 50]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
REGIONAL 
TO GLOBAL

[Page 51]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
100RC Post Industrial Group – Next Economy
Whilst Bristol has a great story to share, we have a lot to learn from other cities. We want to explore how other cities are addressing the legacy of post-industrialisation to transform into thriving and vibrant places
We will work with the post-industrial cities of Glasgow, Boulder, Durban, Huangshi, 
Melbourne, Pittsburgh, Rotterdam and Vejle to share best practice and develop new innovative approaches to local challenges.
Delivery
• Potential partners: Multiple platform partners, including Arup, Arcadis, EY, 
CISCO, Microsoft, Siemens, Veolia, WWF, and others. 
• Timescale: Medium-term
Urban Integrated 
Diagnostics
The Urban Integrated Diagnostics project promotes research and innovation initiatives that help to improve the city’s health, well-being and prosperity as they face up to challenges of modern urban living.
The Bristol ‘pilot’ project will bring citizens together with researchers, local authorities and partners from business and the third sector aimed at investigating the very real challenges facing the city across four areas: mobility and accessibility, health and happiness, equality and inclusion, and tackling dependency on fossil fuels. Bristol will learn from other pilot cities of York, Leeds, Newcastle & Gateshead, and Birmingham.
Delivery
• Potential partners: Bristol City Council, South Gloucester City Council, University of Bristol, University of the West of England.
• Timescale: Short-term
REGIONAL TO GLOBAL
Fair
Liveable
Sustainable
Agile
Connected
Fair
Liveable
Sustainable
Agile
Connected

[Page 52]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
Resilience Impact 
Assessment
Bristol City Council currently requires major initiatives and investments to be subject to an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and an Equalities Impact Assessment (EQIA). The use of a resilience lens to assess the impact of initiatives and projects would provide an integrated and systemic view of risks and impacts associated with city interventions. Some 100RC cities such as have introduced the use of the resilience lens to assess projects. New Orleans, for example, has established a 
Resilience Design Review Committee for regular project review.
The release of this strategy provides a timely opportunity to consider how resilience is embedded into design and implementation of city and regional projects. A group of officers will be convened in the City Council to develop proposals for integrating resilience thinking into internal assessment processes.
Delivery
• Potential partners: Bristol City Council, 100RC Cities
• Timeline: Short-term
REGIONAL TO GLOBAL
Learning from elsewhere: Resilience Design Review Committee, New Orleans
The City of New Orleans has established a Resilience Design Review Committee to undertake regular project reviews. This meets monthly to review and advise the CRO on all construction projects either funded as a resilience programme or that have storm water and green infrastructure components. http://nola.gov/resilience/designreview/
Resilience and West of 
England devolution deal
Bath, Bristol and South Gloucestershire councils have proposed £1bn West of 
England devolution deal which is now up for public consultation. The deal would devolve, from the government, agreed funding and powers to the region, including decisions regarding transport, investment, funding, skills training, business support, housing and strategic planning.
A workshop to explore how devolution of funding and powers could improve city resilience will be undertaken, and integrated into the new governance structures. 
Delivery
• Potential city partners: Bristol City Council, Bath and North East Somerset 
Council, South Gloucestershire Council. 
• Timescale: Medium-term
Fair
Liveable
Sustainable
Agile
Connected
Fair
Liveable
Sustainable
Agile
Connected

[Page 53]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
Climate Strategy and Energy Framework
Bristol City Council has created the framework ‘Our Resilient Culture: A Framework for Climate an Energy Security’ as part of Bristol Green Capital 2015. This is the start of an ambitious process which seeks to create integrated, adaptable and inclusive sustainable city. This low carbon plan will be vital to reach the 80% reduction in greenhouse emissions by 2050 which is Bristol’s Compact of Mayors target.
This is to be annual reviewed and refreshed every three years, to provide a continuous process of improvement and ensure that all co-benefits anticipated are as effective and relevant as projected. This will review periodically to consider extra additions such as including scope 3 carbon emissions in the carbon profile.
Delivery
• Potential partners: Bristol City Council 
• Timescale: Medium-long term
British Standard on city resilience
The British Standards Institute is working to develop a good practice guidance standard in relation to city Resilience. 
Bristol, amongst other 100RC cities, will host a workshop to inform the development of the standard, peer reviewing the intended approach. This is to reflect the status and work that is continuing in Bristol to make it more resilient. 
The standard will act as guidance for the city leaders and as a management framework for executives with responsibility for different resilience themes within cities.
Delivery
• Potential partners: Cabinet Office, Glasgow, Manchester, London, 100RC 
• Timescale: Short-term
REGIONAL TO GLOBAL
Fair
Liveable
Sustainable
Agile
Connected
Fair
Liveable
Sustainable
Agile
Connected

[Page 54]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
Building on Success: Bristol Energy Company and Bristol Waste Company
In 2015, Bristol launched the third municipal energy company in the UK. Bristol Energy is a fully licensed energy supply company, wholly owned by Bristol City Council. 
The Energy Company aims offer competitive, fair and simple energy tariffs with any profits reinvested back into local communities. Over time it will become the delivery vehicle for major energy efficiency and low carbon energy projects. Its initiatives focus on supporting customers to use less energy, make homes cheaper to heat and helping communities become more self-sufficient. 
This provides a new model of ownership, allowing a focus on the delivery of public good. 
It is an approach that has been replicated with Bristol Waste Company. Bristol will learn from this way of working, which may be replicable in other areas. 
Adaptation & resilience framework for the Bristol 
Avon catchment
This is a multi-agency collaborative initiative to identify opportunities and risks for organisations by climate change disruption and economic austerity through greater integration of actions across sectors and political boundaries working at a catchment scale. This innovative initiative is in the process of engaging with other key strategic planning organisations and infrastructure providers to understand the interdependent risks and opportunities and deliver cross-sectoral adaptation actions in spatial planning at a catchment scale. It will address relevant Global Sustainable 
Development Goals at a local scale and highlight where the enhancement of our regional natural capital could be made in multiple distributed locations, to deliver multi-beneficial outcomes from collaborative investments.
The work stream currently involves aligning this work with current and future strategic planning. By integrating the framework into existing work streams, operational and investment plans, development decisions can be made based on wider identified risks, with wider costed solutions and routes to delivery that enhance the value of existing and future investments in the region. The Framework will begin to address local adaptation based on the risks identified in the latest UK 
Climate Change Risk Assessment July 2017 and other more specific locally identified risks. The Framework will share best practise with the Local Adaptation Advisory 
Panel who will be advising central government on the next National Adaptation 
Programme due in 2018. The ultimate aim is to create an attractive sustainable place for future generations, with a strong regional economy and enduring infrastructure supported by sustainable agriculture and resilient natural capital.
Delivery
• Potential partners: Wessex Water, Environment Agency, Natural England, 
Highways England, BCC, South Gloucestershire, Bath and North east Somerset 
Council, Wiltshire County Council, West of England Nature Partnership, Wiltshire 
Wildlife Trust, West of England Local Enterprise Partnership, Wiltshire and 
Swindon Local Enterprise Partnership, Bristol Water, Bristol Avon Catchment 
Partnership.
• Timescales: Medium-term to Long term
Resilience Value
This approach is bringing together a wide range of stakeholders with diverse interests to plan in an integrated way for the long-term resilience of our region’s natural resources. This offers a resilience dividend in terms of increasing resilience to climate change risks as well as improving biodiversity, recreation, food production and reducing costs associated with treating polluted water course.
REGIONAL TO GLOBAL
Fair
Liveable
Sustainable
Agile
Connected

[Page 55]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
Horizon scanning
Bristol is Open
In order to keep preparing for change we will need to carry on anticipating future trends and risks. Whilst the Civil Contingencies Act currently limits forward planning to 5 year time horizon the government recognises the merits of longer-term planning and the Ministry of Defence’s (MoD) Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre is constantly y in engaged in anticipating future global trends with a 30 year out time horizon. In Bristol we would like to use and build on this work as well as the future scenarios developed by Arup for this strategy (see Appendix 1) to evolve our planning for emerging challenges such as security of infrastructure and other city services to cyber threats.
Delivery
• Potential partners: Potential partners: Bristol City Council Civil Protection 
Unit, Schumacher Institute (Prepare for Change programme), Arup, MoD 
Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre, 100RC network, 100RC Platform 
Partners
• Timescales: Short to medium-term
Resilience Value
Horizon scanning and keep abreast of weak signals and emerging global trends will help us to be an agile city that can respond to change and develop integrated, crosssector and multi-agency response to complex challenges such as cyber security.
Bristol City Council and the University of Bristol. BIO is deploying a city scale open and programmable test-bed for experimentation and digital innovation in smart cities. Embedded new technologies cut across all aspects of the city development including ultra high-speed connectivity, Internet of Things (IoT), cyber-security, data analytics, transport and utilities. BIO works with local partners, SMEs and large corporations to develop and demonstrate technology solutions and services for smart cities.
Bristol Is Open advocates that smart technologies are a critical enabler for resilience in cities.
Delivery
• Potential partners: Bristol City Council, University of Bristol, Local Partners (Engineshed, WaterShed, @Bristol, Knowle West Media Centre), strategic partners (NEC, Interdigital, Nokia)
Resilience Value
The “smart” offering in Bristol Is Open, is guided by the principle that every resident should have access to technologies that are essential for their productivity, wellbeing and enjoyment. The unique proposition on programmability empowers local residents, communities and businesses to innovate and develop new smart capabilities to better serve their social and economic needs and ultimately enables new approaches that will help the city to prosper.
Fair
Fair
Liveable
Liveable
Sustainable
Sustainable
Agile
Agile
Connected
Connected
REGIONAL TO GLOBAL

[Page 56]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
The Strategy sets out a clear framework and set of resilience lenses through which to prioritise actions which will ensure the city is on course towards a flourishing future. It will also be important for individuals and organisations to change and adapt the way they work to meet the fiscal, social and environmental challenges ahead. Through the process of developing the 
Strategy, five ways of working have been identified that are strongly aligned with the qualities of resilience – see Fig X.
6. OPERATIONALISING 
RESILIENCE
Resourceful
Robust
Redundant
Inclusive
Flexible
Integerated
Reflective
Focus on assets
Co-create
Disrupt
Learn
Move upstream
Resilient Ways of Working

[Page 57]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
Asset Based Community Development Approach (ABCD) in Bristol
The Bristol City Council Community Development team has been piloting the ABCD approach with some communities in the city and there are many stories emerging about how communities are taking action to make things happen in their neighbourhoods. One such story is Bristol ‘Soup’ in St Pauls. Four Bristol women came together to organise the first Bristol ‘Soup’, an idea which came from Detroit in the 
US and there are a few across the UK. As the name suggests it’s a big eating (or drinking) of Soup! People pay for a bowl of soup (which has been donated), local groups pitch to win the money taken on the night and the audience votes for the idea they like the most. The first event saw 80 people attend at St Pauls Learning Centre and raised £320. Of the four pitches the favourite was Bristol West Indian Cricket Club who went away with the winnings. They were featured in a programme on 
Made in Bristol TV.
These ways of working are not new to the city; as described below there are many examples of organisations already piloting or embedding these approaches.
The five ways of working are;
1. FOCUSING ON ASSETS
An asset-based approach recognises and builds on the human, social and physical capital that exists within local communities. It is a positive way to work with people by identifying what they value most and then shaping public services that meet real needs. This is in contrast to a deficit model which tends to focus on the negative aspects in communities and try to “fix” them.
It is a positive way to work with people by identifying what they value most and then shaping public services that meet real needs.

[Page 58]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
Think Family
Bristol’s Think Family programme is achieving life-changing results for the city’s troubled families. The council, working in partnership with Avon and Somerset Police, has developed an approach to identify vulnerable children at risk of sexual exploitation and delivering necessary support at an early stage. Underpinning the approach is the marriage of a data warehouse containing the records of 
170,000 individuals across 54,000 families and advanced predictive analytics most commonly used to predict risk in the finance sector. 
The outcomes are impressive. Adopting this approach, that requires professionals to see the problems facing a family as a whole and to treat these issues holistically, the team has increased the number of families that can be supported from 150 to 1000 per year. There has been a 50% reduction in unauthorised school absences, the number of police call-outs has halved and there has been a three-quarters drop in adults requiring Anti-Social Behaviour intervention. The result is an adaptable model that is identifying families at risk of breakdown and enabling intervention before issues become entrenched. The programme is a beacon of best practice, attracting substantial government interest with nearly 50 local authorities already learning from it.
2. MOVING UPSTREAM
There is strong evidence that tackling “upstream” factors in people’s lives such as housing, neighbourhood conditions and access to jobs can reduce “downstream” disparities in health – particularly among racial and ethnic minorities. The principle of moving upstream can applied more broadly to thinking about preventing or averting difficulties in people’s lives before they become a problem to solve. Bristol has been piloting and developing an approach to early intervention in troubled families which have yielded impressive results. The principles can be extended to most areas of service delivery to ensure that risk factors are identified, and treated holistically by a range of professional working together, before they become entrenched and costly problems to solve.
Bristol has been piloting and developing an approach to early intervention in troubled families which have yielded impressive results.

[Page 59]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
3. CO-CREATING
In the business world, co-creation means involving your customers in produce design because it makes good business sense. There is a growing recognition that this approach also pays dividends when designing and delivering services in the public sector. Creating new solutions with people, not for them, can help drive radical innovation. However, this requires a culture-shift away from top-down, bureaucratic processes. In Bristol there is a real appetite for co-creation and many city partnerships have been established to help drive this new way of working. One example is the way the new Bristol Impact Fund was developed. The proposed city Office will be an important vehicle for encouraging and modelling ways of co-creating solutions.
Bristol Impact Fund
Bristol City Council currently invests around £7.7m per year in grants to Voluntary and Community Sector (VCS) organisations. Historically these grants have been delivered through many separate funding streams with no single view of how well that funding is working for the city as a whole for example in reducing inequalities or improving health and wellbeing. The decision was taken to align the grant streams through one “Prospectus” in order to focus on priorities and challenges and be clear about outcomes. This Prospectus, which was developed in partnership with VCS partners led by Voscur, represents an exciting and bold step forward in how the Council works with VCS colleagues to co-design and co-create a shared view of how to address the needs in our city. It also represents a clear commitment to work with the expertise and local knowledge of the VCS to shape and deliver the right support and services to those most in need of support.
In Bristol there is a real appetite for cocreation and many city partnerships have been established to help drive this new way of working.

[Page 60]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
The Bristol Pound
Bristol’s currency – the Bristol Pound (£B) – was launched in 2012 as a collaboration between the Bristol Pound Community Interest 
Company, Bristol Credit Union, Bristol City Council, the Transition 
Network, New Economics Foundation and QOIN. The currency, like the 
Brixton Pound and other UK schemes, aims to create local economic resilience and greater self-determination by disrupting patterns of globalisation and chain-store dominance. Four years on there are more than £B1million in circulation in the city and the BPound team are now working with some of the 900 businesses enrolled in developing an interest-free credit scheme across their supply chains. Some of the benefit some of the benfits to the city of using the BPound are:
• Shortening the supply chain and hence carbon footprint (outlets using the BPound have to demonstrate they sources products/ ingredients locally);
• Building a culture of shopping locally which contributes to neighbourhood social cohesion;
• Reducing shopper’s car trips/car emissions as most BPound shops are walking distance in neighbourhoods
4. DISRUPTING
As discussed in Section 1.5 the idea of “disruption” is central to challenging business as usual and unlocking parts of the system that are not currently steering us towards a resilient future. The idea may not sit comfortably with many people – it’s always easier to work within the status quo – but the challenges ahead such as climate change and population growth are too big to sleepwalk into the future cling onto the status quo. And anyway, disruption will happen whether we like it or not; you only need to look at the phenomenal success of Uber or AirBnB to see that change will happen in spite of the system. In Bristol we already have a strong culture of disruption for social innovation and we can build on this and grow our confidence to proactively shape the future city that we want for our children and grandchildren.
In Bristol we already have a strong culture of disruption for social innovation and we can build on this and grow our confidence to proactively shape the future city that we want for our children and grandchildren.

[Page 61]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
Institution learning to transform the city: Urban Living Programme
Institutional learning in a city tends to happen in an ad hoc way beneath the collective radar. The Urban Living Programme (ULP) has created an opportunity for highly visible institutional learning to occur across sector and thematic boundaries by taking a “whole city” approach. The shared learning – and new ways of working together – derived from this first-of-its-kind investment by the seven UK Research 
Councils and the government’s innovation agency is aimed at aimed at rewriting the blueprint for the evolution of city living.
Bristol was one of five cities awarded ULP funding along with 
Birmingham, Leeds, Newcastle and Gateshead and York. The 
Bristol project team - Urban Integrated Diagnostics (Urban ID) - has forged an innovative partnership across two universities (Bristol and West of England), two local authorities (Bristol City and South 
Gloucestershire), Bristol Green Capital Partnership, Bristol Health 
Partners and 11 other organisations.
The Bristol Urban ID partnership will carry out a shared enquiry into the question: what is stopping Bristol from bridging the gap between its current situation and the desired future as encapsulated in the City’s various visions and aspirations?
The learning from this pilot phase will help to develop a cadre of cross-sector city leaders and organisations that are willing to challenge the prevailing ‘business as usual’ approaches and test out new ways interdisciplinary and participatory ways of working that empower citizens and put end users at the heart of decision-making processes.
5. LEARNING
Individuals and institutions that are reflective use past experience to inform future decisions, and will modify standards and behaviours accordingly. 
Bristol is already committed to promoting individual learning and in 2015 set up the Learning City partnership to: champion learning for all ages and all communities; commission activity to increase participation and achievement; communicate messages about learning; and celebrate the benefits of learning as a way to transform lives. In 2016 Bristol became the first city in 
England to become part of the UNESCO Global Network of Learning Cities.
In 2016 Bristol became the first city in England to become part of the UNESCO 
Global Network of 
Learning Cities.

[Page 62]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
Developing this Strategy has been the first step on the journey towards a more resilient and flourishing future. All the stakeholders involved – including the Resilience Sounding board – are fully committed to taking this forward to implementation. The next steps now are to:
• Establish ownership – the proposed Mayor’s City Office offers a strong place to hold the Strategy and oversee its future implementation;
• Secure additional resource – the funding from 100RC for Chief Resilience 
Officer ends at the beginning of February 2017;
• Develop and investment programme to work with 100RCplatform partners – there is up to $5million of pro bono city tools and services on offer to Bristol and the region which will need to be matched with city priorities;
• Carry on the city conversation and work out how to use this Strategy as a living document…it doesn’t end here, this is just the start!
7. NEXT STEPS

[Page 63]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
1. 
A citywide local currency, see bristolpound.org
2. 
3. http://ehs.unu.edu/blog/5-facts/5-facts-on-climate-migrants.html [accessed September 2016]
4. 
Based on the proportion of LSOAs in the most deprived nationally in the 2015 Indices of Multiple Deprivation (compared with their position in 2004), as set out in Alasdair Rae, Ruth Hamilton, Rich Crisp and Ryan Powell, uk/report/overcoming-deprivation-and-disconnection-uk-cities, accessed September 2016]
5. 
August 2016]
6. 
VENTURER, https://venturer-cars.com [accessed August 2016]
7. http://news.bristol.gov.uk/bristol-scoops-top-sustainable-food-cities-award [accessed August 2016]
8. 
9. 
2016]
10. [accessed August 2016]
11. “The Bristol Approach to Citizen Sensing” [https://issuu.com/knowlewestmedia/docs/bristol_approach__citizen_ sensing_a] 5 August 2016
12. documents/20182/303221/Grants+consultation+prospectus+proposal/920b9299-7dcb-4e5f-a572-07593f1c5a61
13. uploads/2015/07/Manifesto-for-Race-Equality-9Oct2015b-Appendix.pdf
14. “What does it mean to be a pledge member” [http://bristolgreencapital.org/about/green-capital-pledge/] 5 
August 2016
15. 
16. 
An inclusive growth monitor for measuring the relationship between poverty and growth, Joseph Rowntree 
FOOTNOTES

[Page 65]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
Resilience scenarios
Bristol 2066
May 2016 
The purpose of scenario thinking is not to identify the most likely future, but to create a map of uncertainty — to acknowledge and examine the visible and hidden forces that are driving us toward the unknown future. Scenarios are created and used in sets of multiple stories that capture a range of possibilities, good and bad, expected and surprising. They are designed to stretch our thinking about emerging changes and the opportunities and threats that the future might hold. They allow us to weigh our choices more carefully when making short-term and long-term strategic decisions, and they can help us identify gaps in knowledge and priorities for further research.
In order to build a “scenario set”, two orthogonal axes are selected that best exploit two key future uncertainties. 
These axes define a matrix of four quadrants, each of which represent four contrasting but credible futures. 
Scenarios are a potentially powerful tool for developing and testing policies. They can help policy makers develop a more nuanced, flexible response to future possibilities, and to better anticipate and manage risk in the context of future uncertainty. In addition to helping organisations (including nation states) make better informed, more robust decisions, scenarios can be used to challenge preconceived views of the future and associated policies. 
Scenarios can provide a good framework and tool for facilitating a strategic discussion on policy options, in meetings or in a workshop setting. Where possible, a cross section of stakeholders should be engaged in the policy development process so that they can contribute to the analysis and have shared ownership of the outcomes. Metrics can also be used to provide early warning signs of future developments and directional change.
Context and usages
The future is likely to contain elements of multiple scenarios in a combination that cannot be anticipated. It is therefore useful to test current or future policies against a range of scenarios to see how effective they are. The objective of policy analysis is explore which policies are going to maximise the opportunities and mitigate the challenges, and which are resilient to the future shocks in each scenario. 
When analysing different options under each scenario, it is important that users indicate how a policy or range of policies will be implemented in a specific scenario. 
While similar policies may be developed across a range of scenarios, the methods of delivery may be quite different. 
Potential interactions with the policy objectives should also be explored.
This process is often called wind-tunnelling and it can be undertaken in a workshop environment by a policy team or a broader mix of stakeholders. The latter generally provides better insights and more robust analysis. 
In all cases, care is needed to safeguard against preconceived views on both future context and in relation to specific policies.
When testing policies against scenarios it is crucial to consider:
• 
The relevance of a policy, as it may not be a significant issue in a particular scenario 
• 
Their practicality, as the policy may not be effective given the conditions in the scenario, or it may not be politically or financially deliverable; and 
• 
Their implementation, as it may be that a policy is potentially successful across a range of scenarios but the way it is presented or implemented in each could vary.
Decisions taken should not simply be based on a scoring of policies against the scenarios. There may be sound reasons why a policy that is contingent on a particular scenario should be implemented. In these circumstances the analysis can be used to consider how the policy could be adapted to make it more robust in other scenarios and to consider the associated risks.
Scenarios should not be seen as a mechanical approach to achieving the ‘right’ policy. They do not remove future uncertainty and there are other complimentary policy tools that can be applied.
Wind-tunneling policy:
Sources: Sami Consulting and Global Business Network (GBN)
Resilience scenarios
Bristol 2066

[Page 66]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
Thrive & Survive high climate change impact high societal wellbeing
The population has grown significantly, as a result of inward migration and indigenous growth. New pressures are expected due to further population growth – on housing, transport, health and education in particular. Bristol is piloting a range of educational and vocational programmes aimed at nurturing a new generation of work-ready youths. Multi-culturalism is thriving and a wide crosssection of Bristol society actively participates in political and cultural life. 
Green and blue infrastructure helps to protect Bristolians from severe flooding and drought. Adaptation measures are providing important socio-economic returns. Bristol has learnt to cope with excessive rainfall. 
A new wetland area, the 
West of England Estuary, has proved successful in mitigating flood impacts while acting as a year-round wildfowl and wetlands centre. 
Sea level rise has been negligible to date. However there are concerns that this may scale dramatically.
With the election of the first city region mayor in 2019, significant decision making powers have devolved to the local level. However, climate change and energy remain under central Government control. The Local Resilience 
Forum (LRF) brings together the police and other emergency responders.
Bristol society places great value on green space, nature and ecosystem services. 
There is a closer relationship between rural hinterlands and cities in relation to food, energy and water. The extensive water park along the Gorge breathes new life into the area and makes the most of this impressive asset at the heart of the city region. 
A diverse mix of housing types and tenures ensures that homes are affordable.
Organisation
Places
Prosperity & Worth
People
2019
The first mayor is elected for the Bristol city region, covering the four 
Unitary Authority areas (Bath and North East Somerset, Bristol, North 
Somerset and South Gloucestershire)
2021
Water scarcity and record numbers of natural disasters intensify worldwide migration patterns
2036
Record insurance claims follow severe flooding in the Bristol city region
2045
The remains of the West Antarctic ice sheet collapses due to a number of tipping points having been triggered, including massive methane release 
2046
The Warsaw Educational Reform Protocol puts sustainability at the core of secondary school curricula globally
2050
Bristol fails to reach its carbon neutral target set in 2015
Timeline:
Strong political leadership, community cohesion, civic responsibility and a sharing economy are credited with having maintained relatively high levels of social wellbeing in challenging times. Looking forward, it is feared that this could be eroded as further climate change unfolds. Despite significant investment in technology and low-carbon energy solutions, evidence suggests that key tipping points have triggered a highly unstable phase of advanced climate change. The Bristol city region regularly suffers from excessive rainfall and flooding, in addition to occasional and protracted heat waves during the summer months as temperatures reach 40°C (104°F). Intense periods of drought 
2066 Narrative: occur every 2-3 years. To date, these events have periodically impacted the local economy, on account of disruption to business activities and services. Far-sighted mitigation and adaptation strategies have helped to limit climate change impacts on essential services such as transport, healthcare and education. Systems are adaptive and able to learn, thereby flexing according to context and circumstances. 
The private sector has part-funded measures to protect the local watershed, river basin and catchment areas with the 
Avon Barrier providing energy generation and additional road access across the River Avon. 
• advanced climate change 
• extreme weather
• major infrastructure failure 
• economic downturn
Shocks & Stresses: 
• environmental degradation 
• anti-microbial resistance 
• water shortages 
• food supply © Arup 
Survival of the 
Fittest high climate change impact low societal wellbeing
The population has swelled and social tensions run high. Communities are fragmented and xenophobia is on the rise. Informal 
Settlements have formed in 
St Pauls and many historians have commented on the similarities with the riots back in 1980. The young and elderly are most vulnerable to climate change impacts. 
Public disorder and crime is rife. Clifton community have turned their back on the city and face outwards, towards the rural, food growing hinterland.
Bristol city becomes increasingly dense with the population reaching half a million residents by mid2025. Heat waves are felt even more keenly in the city and green and blue infrastructure fails to contain the effects of extreme weather. The Cumberland basin is completely submerged and The Portway is no longer accessible. 
Widespread deforestation has gradually denuded Leigh 
Woods and Blaise Castle 
Estate.
Decision making in the UK is even more centralised with even less ability for local areas to make decisions in their locality. Thousands of grassroots organisations have formed in the city, many of which have adopted an anarchy philosophy. 
Municipal services are reduced due to lack of funds, causing progressive urban decay.
GDP is still used as a metric to measure economic activity and success in the UK, but it is one which shows Bristol to be failing dramatically, along with many other cities worldwide. Unemployment is at its highest rate for decades. 
Organisation
Places
Prosperity & Worth
People
Global efforts have failed to curtail carbon emissions and the world is now experiencing run away climate change. A third of all species are at high risk of extinction and marine food chains have collapsed. GM food is accepted as a much needed technology response. Successive changes in UK government policy have resulted in mismanagement of the associated risks. Extreme weather events cause persistent disruption, knocking out critical infrastructure with increasing regularity in Bristol. Communications are occasionally interrupted by blackouts and brownouts, and periodic floods and heat waves wreak havoc in terms of transport, energy, housing and access to services. Sea levels are beginning to impinge on waterfront property, forcing adaptation or demolition. The NHS has collapsed as climate change has 
2066 Narrative: brought new, more virulent strains of virus to the UK. Multicultural society has become fragmented, and a dominant underclass has emerged. Communities cluster together, some trapped in dense high-rises while others take to living in makeshift flotillas and squatting in Colston Tower and other abandoned properties. Farming collectives patrol and protect crops. Deforestation is rampant as fuel is becoming increasingly scarce. The affluent minority has moved overseas, or to fortress communities in the countryside. A wealthy enclave remains in Clifton on high ground. Areas of Clifton Downs are being used for food production so the wealthier have access to local produce. Private security is a lucrative business and cyber-crime is rampant.
• resource scarcity, food & fuel supply 
• international event 
• pandemic 
• critical infrastructure 
Shocks & Stresses: 
• advanced climate change & extreme weather 
• economic downturn 
• civil & political unrest
• cyber security
2020
Evidence suggests that 80% of under 35s in Bristol are unable to purchase their own home, marking growing inequality
2033
High dependency ratios lead to a pension crisis in Japan and parts of 
Europe, sparking a prolonged global recession
2038
A distressing year of riots amongst the informal settlements in 
St Pauls
2045
The NHS collapses due to a massive rise in demand for health services following a national pandemic
2049
Global shortages of food and water have triggered mass movements of people, leading to conflict and famine
2050
Bristol fails to reach its carbon neutral target set in 2015
2052
The insurance market collapses rendering many asset classes uninsurable. The unprotected Bristol’s Harbourside 2052 flood causes the ss Great Britain to capsize
2059
Arctic summer ice melts completely for the first time
Timeline:

[Page 67]
BRISTOL RESILIENCE STRATEGY
Regulated 
Carbon
Inflation has led to an increased cost of living. 
Imported goods are also expensive. Many basic consumer needs are met by local Bristol businesses and producers, all of which are burdened by enforced carbon accounting requirements and labelling.
Some people have good relationships with neighbours, but others are increasingly socially isolated.
Public transport systems, comprising light rail and trams, have been established in Bristol. Car use is severely limited due to carbon consumption controls and measures. The M32 becomes the first Personal 
Rapid Transit (PRT) Highway route in the city.
The city is more selfcontained, but with digital technologies creating connections elsewhere.
Local authorities have very little power or funding. 
Historians have remarked that they now perform a similar role to that of parish councils in the early 21st 
Century.
Power largely remains in the hands of central government.
Bristol city region is the first to approve a 4-day working week as normal practice.
The aerospace industry in Bristol has collapsed, bringing about a significant loss of local jobs. As a result, there is a huge shift towards local service and “maker” jobs, such as crafts and artisan food production.
National strengths in green technology which can also be seen in Bristol.
Organisation
Places
Prosperity & Worth
People low societal wellbeing low climate change impact
2025
The first organisations in Bristol take on the 4-day week proposals. Bristol Post headline suggests we are becoming “lazy” and “unproductive”.
2026
The European Union collapses
2033
The UK’s first driverless cars take to the roads in Bristol
2038
Massive flooding in Bangladesh forces climate change back up the political agenda
2039
The UK government appoints a Carbon Commissar to enforce personal carbon rationing
2040
Bristol Port and Bristol Airport close due to carbon controls. The 
M32 becomes a PRT Highway
2043
A chemical weapons attack is launched on a major European city
2058
Cyber-criminal activity paralyses one of the busiest shipping hubs, impacting global supply chains, logistics and food distribution
Timeline:
An international coalition, of which the UK is a part, is losing a protracted war on terror. There is a much-feared CBRN threat (chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear), although this has only manifested overseas to date. While occasional extreme weather continues to impact the UK, it is thought that climate change has been largely contained to within 
2 degrees. Across the UK, lifestyles are determined by a strict and enforced scheme of carbon consumption control, imposed by UK central government and overseen by a 
Carbon Commissar. As with many other woodlands across the UK, access to Leigh Woods has been prohibited in order to safeguard its carbon sequestration function. Rail and bus services have been re-nationalised. External costs are 
2066 Narrative: internalized and “priced in” to goods and services. This has contributed to a relatively high cost of living. Horizons and mobility have shrunk to the extent that people live a more local and community-focused lifestyle. The government continues to promote the development of green and innovative technology. However, it is often accused of having favoured the wrong solutions. Smart grids and intelligent transport systems are shown to be vulnerable to hacking. 
Wider cyber-criminal activity has resulted in increased theft, extortion and blackmail. Fear and insecurity has become rife, linked to the digital lifestyles that have been taken for granted for so long, particularly as Bristol was a pioneer in integrating digital technologies into the City’s operations.
• moderate climate change 
• severe weather 
• economic recession, 
• civil and political unrest
Shocks & Stresses: 
• cybersecurity 
• terrorism and malicious attacks 
• social inequality © Arup 
Green & Smart high societal wellbeing low climate change impact
Bristol society has seen considerable behavioural change regarding consumer lifestyles and resource use, and has largely embraced zero waste and the circular economy concept. 
Domestic tourismundergoes a resurgence and public transport is well resourced. 
Bristol’s population is growing significantly, largely on account of of the number of people.
Allotments and urban agriculture are enjoying a record level of public support. In order to meet this increasing demand, allotments, are now a compulsory component of large new developments. 
Green and blue infrastructure helps to limit the impacts of only occasional extreme weather events.
The directly elected mayor of Bristol city region has reorganised policing to align with the Greater Bristol 
Authority. Citizens are given a genuine voice in decision making across all key areas. 
London and other regional cities are driving economic activity and we have seen more balanced growth trends between the regions. 
Green retrofit, green roofs and green walls are on the rise as a result of a fullyfunded “Retrofit Ramp-Up” programme. External costs are internalized. Bristol is a world leader in green technology, aerospace and advanced technology and manufacturing.
Organisation
Places
Prosperity & Worth
People
Most global governments are successfully delivering against their carbon emissions reduction targets. It is widely thought that climate change has been successfully contained to within 1.5 degrees. A Well-Being Index is used in political decision making in Bristol and many other devolved areas of the UK. The Circular City initiative, adopted by several 
UK cities, has led to a step-change increase in resource efficiency. Bath has been recognised for its excellence in resource hyper-efficiency and has become a leading example globally. Urban hubs such as Southmead, Hengrove and 
Thornbury have become increasingly restructured around localized services that support and promote zero waste. 
Producers are required by international law to design goods for disassembly and reuse globally. There has been an accelerated effort to construct net-zero homes in Bristol’s 
2066 Narrative: rural areas and on brownfield sites, and a marked increase in regional food production in recent years. North Somerset has pioneered quality green housing in the UK. Smart metering is used across all domestic and commercial asset types, helping manage demand for energy and water. A wide range of local businesses offer high quality jobs. Over 
500,000 new jobs have been generated as a result of the 
Vision for Sustainable Growth. Social equality has become an important political objective, and Bristol has benefitted from a more equitable distribution of wealth. The elected mayor of the Bristol city region has greater fiscal control and has increased taxes to pay for carbon reduction measures. Crime is at a record low. Bristol’s society is ethically diverse, closeknit and supportive.
• advanced climate change 
• resource scarcity 
Shocks & Stresses: 
• food security 
• population growth
2018
Government targets are made legally binding at COP24
2020
Transport for Greater Bristol was established in 2020 as a result of the Cities and Local Government Devolution Act of 2016. Bristol city imposes rent controls on private sector rented properties
2029
The C400 Cities Climate Leadership Group ratchet up city GHG emissions targets
2030 
The M32 is demolished and the River Frome is opened up and made accessible 
2037
Producers are required by law to design goods for disassembly and reuse in Europe
2040
Bristol announces its decision to become a car-free city centre
2045
Following the carbon neutral target being achieved 5 years in advance, Bristol is the first city to be awarded the title of European 
Green Capital twice
Timeline: