[Page 1]
Systematization series for the Americas and the Caribbean ‘Making Cities Resilient’ Campaign (2010-2020)
Mapping the Campaign’s outcomes and greatest achievements in Brazil to continue building urban resilience
Final Version
January 2022

[Page 2]
MCR Campaign – Systematization report for the Americas and the Caribbean 
1078 cities in Brazil registered to the MCR Campaign over the last decade, accounting for near a fourth of global enrolments. 
Most represented regions were the São Paulo State (467 cities), 
Paraná (320 cities), Minas 
Gerais (134 cities), and Rio de 
Janeiro State (46 cities). municipalities in Brazil have formulated a 
Local Plan for the implementation of DRR actions under the MCR Campaign. Cities also warn about how unfavourable institutional settings can limit their planning capacities – i.e., lack of technical capacities, of human and financial resources, political support.
More than
AM
AC
RR
RO
MT
MS
RG
SC
PR
SP
MG
RJ
ES
BA
GO
DF
TO
PA
AP
MA
PI
CE
RN
PB
PE
AL
SE
Executive summary 
Under UNDRR’s Campaign “Making Cities Resilient: my city is getting ready!”, local governments in Brazil have spearheaded national, regional, and global discussions and actions in the field of urban resilience over the last decade.
This document presents and analyses the progress made by Brazilian local governments within the framework of the Making Cities Resilient (MCR) Campaign. With the Campaign reaching an end, this report takes the opportunity to monitor the Campaign’s impact, collect local feedback, and make strategic prospections on the future of urban resilience initiatives in Brazil and globally.
The MCR Campaign’s outcomes and greatest achievements in Brazil include:

[Page 3]
MCR Campaign – Systematization report for the Americas and the Caribbean municipalities in Brazil have implemented disaster risk reduction actions under the MCR 
Campaign, mostly in four policy sectors: 
Enhanced risk governance and disaster preparedness (Essentials 1 and 
9);
Increased data, knowledge and monitoring of local risks (Essential 2 and Priority 2 of the Sendai 
Framework);
Urban infrastructure solutions (Essentials 
5 and 8); 
Awareness campaigns and capacity-building activities (Essentials 
6, 7 and 9).
HOWEVER, remaining gaps in implementing DRR actions: coordination between municipal sectors (horizontal articulation) and between levels of governments (vertical articulation) 
More than
The Quick Risk Estimation Tool and the Scorecard were the most used the self-assessment tools of the MCR Campaign, with respondent cities highlighting how they helped them to:
Facilitate decision-making processes in disaster risk reduction, especially by improving internal communication.
Increase public awareness regarding disaster risk reduction and provided a better understanding of local risks and issues of resilience.
Guide the formulation of Local Plans and the implementation of disaster risk reduction actions afterward. 
HOWEVER, numerous respondent cities highlighted their lack of human resources, political coordination and support, technical capacity and equipment to increase local risk knowledge.

[Page 4]
MCR Campaign – Systematization report for the Americas and the Caribbean 
Most important contribution of MCR Campaign in Brazil: the strengthening of institutional and social capacity, by the conduction of and/or support to on-site trainings with residents and civil servants on how to plan and implement 
DRR actions.
Local governments need incentives to sustain their engagement with MCR beyond enrolment
A richer diversity of stakeholders needs to be involved in Brazil for risk reduction planning and action implementation 
Brazilian local governments actively engage in city-to-city exchange opportunities
Local governments will benefit from a more intuitive and accessible communication strategy on the MCR framework
Main lessons in Brazil: 
Achieving significant participation of 
Brazilian local governments requires an intermediary level of coordination
Financial support and partnerships for DRR are a priority for Brazilian local governments
Authors
United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction
Regional Office for the Americas and the Caribbean
Johanna Granados – Urban Resilience Lead
Clément Da Cruz – MCR2030 Technical Advisor

[Page 6]
MCR Campaign – Systematization report for the Americas and the Caribbean 
Introduction 
The Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction is the global blueprint for disaster risk reduction. 
Adopted at the Third UN World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction (WCDRR) in March 2015, it was the first major agreement of the post-2015 development agenda. Its seven global targets and four priorities for actions dovetail with a string of other recent global accords for sustainable development over the next decade – notably the New Urban Agenda, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and the Paris 
Agreement on Climate Change. 
Operating an important shift from viewing disasters purely as a matter of relief operations to a pre-emptive approach aligned with sustainable development, the Sendai Framework placed a major emphasis on urban areas. Specifically, the Sendai Framework called for strong political leadership, commitment, and involvement of all stakeholders at local, national, and international levels, to pursue the following goal: “Prevent new and reduce existing disaster risk through the implementation of integrated and inclusive economic, structural, legal, social, health, cultural, educational, environmental, technological, political and institutional measures that prevent and reduce hazard exposure and vulnerability to disaster, increase preparedness for response and recovery, and thus strengthen resilience.”
Under this rationale, Target E of the Sendai Framework aimed to “substantially increase the number of countries with national and local disaster risk reduction strategies by 2020”.
To implement Target E at the local level, the global Campaign on “Making Cities Resilient: My City is 
Getting Ready!” addressed local governance issues towards mitigating urban risk with the aim of helping local governments increase resilience in urban settings.
Since its launch in 2010, the Campaign provided practical tools and capacity-building opportunities for local stakeholders (i.e., public authorities, private actors, civil society organizations) to identify gaps in their resilience strategy and increase their financial, technical and knowledge capacity for development planning and risk management. Through the Campaign, member-cities had the opportunity to take part in a global alliance of local governments committed to building urban resilience and exchange innovative experiences and good practices for better local management. 
The Making Cities Resilient 2030 initiative, MCR2030, builds on the Campaign’s achievements and outcomes. Launched in 2020, it connects cities with local and global technical service providers who can support assessments and planning, provide technical specialized input, and support implementation and monitoring. 
Brazil was one of the most active countries working towards urban resilience during the Campaign. This document summarizes activities and achievements from the Brazilian experience that highlight the impact of a sustained engagement and compromise to achieve safe, sustainable, and resilient cities.

[Page 7]
MCR Campaign – Systematization report for the Americas and the Caribbean 
1. Making Cities Resilient in Brazil 
Local governments in Brazil have spearheaded national, regional, and global discussions and actions in the field of urban resilience over the last decade. With the Americas and the Caribbean accounting for 
45.6% of enrolments worldwide in December 2020 (Figure 1), Brazilian municipalities constituted a driving force behind the region’s strong participation in the global Campaign on “Making Cities Resilient: My City is Getting Ready!”. All in all, 1078 cities in Brazil registered to the Campaign over the last decade (Figure 2).
Figure1. Total number of enrolments in the MCR Campaign, 2010-2020 (by region)
Figure2. Total number of enrolments in the ROAMC region to the MCR Campaign (by countries)
46 %
5%
7%
15%
27%
Americas
Asia and paciﬁc
Europe
Arab States
Africa
Cuba
Trinidad and Tobago
Haiti
United States of America
Paraguay
Uruguay
Venezuela, Boliviarian Rep of
Canada
Jamaica
Bolivia
Costa Rica
Dominican Republic
Panama
Chile
Argentina
Ecuador
Nicaragua
Colombia
Honduras
El Salvador
Guatemala
Mexico
Brazil
Peru
1000
1200

[Page 8]
MCR Campaign – Systematization report for the Americas and the Caribbean 
Fostering sustainable and resilient cities has indeed become one of the greatest and most urgent challenges for Brazilian local governments. For urban settlements in Brazil, facing the challenges imposed by climate change comes atop decades-old development issues of acute complexity – such as extreme poverty and inequality, and universal access to public services etc. 
Extreme weather events have in fact doubled in the last 20 years, leaving urban dwellers more vulnerable to disasters of increasing frequency and intensity. Rapid and unplanned population growth, both in large metropolises (e.g., São Paulo, Rio de Janeiro, Salvador da Bahia) and medium-sized cities (e.g., Campinas, 
Curitiba), has also resulted in the construction of housing, schools and hospitals in exposed sites that are strategically unsafe, often at the expense of the environment (i.e., occupation of environmental reserves, contamination of common resources, etc.). Additionally, internally displaced persons and international migrants, whether fleeing conflict or natural hazards, are seeking shelter in cities, exacerbating already existing inequalities and testing the capacity of cities to be truly inclusive and provide accessible public services to all. 
Given the city’s unique characteristic as a complex “system of systems”, pursuing disaster risk reduction at the local level has become particularly relevant to building more resilient societies (GAR, 2019). The critical context we now face, although extremely challenging, is an opportunity for municipal, state-level, and federal governing bodies in Brazil to jointly implement measures aimed at reducing risk in their territories and strengthening the management of their municipalities. Local governments are often the first line of response in the event of a disaster. By being the institutional level closest to both the sources of risks and vulnerable citizens, fostering the participation and leadership of municipal governments in disaster risk reduction is vital. State-level governments are also key actors in Brazil for the coordination of emergency response operations and the planning of sustainable, resilient, long-term recoveries.
2. Objective of this document
3. Methodology 
This document presents and analyses the progress made by Brazilian local governments within the framework of the Making Cities Resilient (MCR) Campaign. With the Campaign reaching an end, this report takes the opportunity to monitor the Campaign’s impact, collect local feedback, and make strategic prospections on the future of urban resilience initiatives in Brazil and globally.
The present document highlights the challenges faced by Brazilian local governments in participating in the 
Campaign and their contributions to disaster risk reduction. The systematization allows for the identification of key learnings for UNDRR-ROAMC to sustain its support to urban resilience building in Brazil, as well as opportunities for Brazilian local governments to accelerate and intensify their resilience journey.
 
This systematization is based on UNDRR-ROAMC data and archives related to the activities and outcomes of the MCR Campaign in Brazil. It also relies on the results of an online survey shared in November 
2019 to each Focal Point of the 1,064 Brazilian municipalities participating in the Campaign at the time. The content of this survey can be found in Annex 1.

[Page 9]
MCR Campaign – Systematization report for the Americas and the Caribbean 
The questionnaire was designed according to the different stages of the Campaign’s action process, being: (1) the diagnosis of local risks through the Campaign’s self-assessment Toolkit; (2) the formulation of a 
Local Plan for DRR; (3) the implementation of concrete actions according to the approved Local Plan.
For each stage, the survey followed three objectives:
→ Estimate the progress made by the participating municipalities in Brazil (impact monitoring), → Highlight the benefits of joining the Campaign in this process (feedback collection), → Identify the difficulties encountered and gaps yet to be overcome (prospective thinking).
Nevertheless, the results of this survey posed some challenges, especially in terms of representativeness, due to a low turnout in the responding municipalities. Of the 1064 municipalities enrolled in the MCR 
Campaign in Brazil, the survey received only 104 responses (Figure 1), representing 9.8% of registered municipalities in Brazil. Although this figure tempers the findings of this survey, it also gives an indication of the reach of UNDRR-ROAMC in Brazil and the actual contribution of local governments to the Campaign (beyond enrolment).
By providing a synthesis of the results obtained from this survey, this document gathers findings to orient the Making Cities Resilient 2030 (MCR2030) initiative in Brazil, the Americas, and the Caribbean. By understanding the needs and learning from the experience of the cities involved, its relevance at the global level will also foster the local implementation of the Sendai Framework to achieve safe, sustainable, and resilient urban spaces.

[Page 10]
MCR Campaign – Systematization report for the Americas and the Caribbean 
Outcomes of the MCR Campaign 
2010-2020 in Brazil
1. Enrolment and participation in the Campaign 
1078 cities in Brazil enroled to the MCR Campaign over the last decade. In line with global and regional trends, the dynamism of the MCR Campaign in Brazil has known two main trends (Figure 3): (1) From 2010 to 2015, the Campaign enabled the structuring of a wide network of actors engaged with DRR. Decision-makers, scholars, private contributors, civil society associations, and community leaders thereby formed the social capital of the Campaign. Acting as a powerful recruiting platform at the local level for further resilience advocacy, enrolments from Brazilian local governments kept increasing until reaching a peak in 2015 (411 new members). (2) After 2015, UNDRR reoriented its strategy towards supporting the implementation of effective resilience actions. This led to a steady decrease in annual enrolment of Brazilian local governments (the last three years being particularly low in new members). Recently registered cities of the 
Campaign appear, however, to be slightly more responsive and dynamic (Figure 3bis). For example, 
31.2% of Brazilian cities that joined the Campaign in 2019 answered our survey, against only 4.1% of the cities that registered in 2015. This could shed light on the Campaign’s difficulty to sustain the interest and engagement of its members over the years. 
Figure3. Annual number of enrolments in the MCR Campaign in Brazil, 2011-2020
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020

[Page 11]
MCR Campaign – Systematization report for the Americas and the Caribbean 
Furthermore, the distribution of the participation of Brazilian municipalities in our survey (Figure 4) reflects regional disparities in the reach of the MCR Campaign across Brazil. The vast majority of responses came from municipalities located in the state of São Paulo (59.6%), although with notable participation from the states of Minas Gerais (14.4%), Paraná (8.7%), and Rio de Janeiro (6.7%). This distribution is in line with the vivid core of support for the MCR Campaign in the south-eastern region of the country, concentrated in the state of São Paulo, and then radiating to the neighbouring states of Paraná, Minas Gerais, Rio de 
Janeiro, and Santa Catarina. The region in fact accounts for a large number of MCR municipalities at the national, regional, and global levels (Figure 4). 
This is largely due to the outstanding work accomplished by the Campaign’s advocate in Brazil, Mr. Sidnei 
Furtado, Director of the Municipal Department of Civil Defence in Campinas (SP). He promoted and followed up on all the enrolments from Brazilian municipalities since his involvement in the Campaign in 
2012. Geographical proximity to the advocate’s workplace thus appears to have had a positive impact on the involvement and dynamism of Brazilian municipalities in the MCR Campaign.
Figure3bis. Proportion of respondents to our survey compared to the total number of Brazilian cities registered in the Campaign each year
2011
2012
2013 total inscription to MCR Campaign
Respondent cities
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
31.2%
5.9%
12.9%
10.1%
4.1%
9.3%
17.9%
12.5%

[Page 12]
MCR Campaign – Systematization report for the Americas and the Caribbean 
São Paulo
Paraná
Minas Gerais
Rio de Janeiro
Espirito Santo
Rio Grande do Sul
Federal District
Santa Catarina
Pernambuco
Alagoas
Pará
Acre
Bahía
Goiás
Sergipe
Amazonas
Mato Grosso
Roraima
Tocantins
AM
AC
RR
RO
MT
MS
RG
SC
PR
SP
MG
RJ
ES
BA
GO
DF
TO
PA
AP
MA
PI
CE
RN
PB
PE
AL
SE
Figure4. Total of cities registered in the MCR Campaign by state in Brazil and spatial representation

[Page 13]
MCR Campaign – Systematization report for the Americas and the Caribbean 
2. Increasing Local Risk Knowledge and applying the 
Campaign Toolkit 
Regarding the application of the MCR Campaign Toolkit, 65.5% of respondent cities declared not having used any of the self-assessment tools since their enrolment in the Campaign (Figure 5). 
The tools developed after the adoption of the Sendai Framework (the Quick Risk Estimation Tool and the Scorecard) were the most used compared to the Local Government Self-Assessment Tool (LG-SAT) operative prior to 2015. Cumulatively, the Quick Risk Estimation Tool and the two versions of the Scorecard were used by more respondent municipalities (19.1%) than the LG-SAT (15.5%).
Figure5. Tools applied by respondent cities to the Nov. 2019 survey (Brazil)
LG-SAT (Local 
Government)
15.5%
6.4%
10.0%
2.7%
65.5%
Tools used
QRE (Quick Risk 
Estimate)
Preliminary
Scorecard
Detailed
Scorecard

[Page 14]
MCR Campaign – Systematization report for the Americas and the Caribbean 
Respondent cities, when using the tools, gave positive feedback on their experience, as they succeeded in both easily following the tool’s methodology and observing concrete impacts afterwards. In this sense, the 
Director of the Municipal Department of Civil Defence of São José do Rio Preto, Mr. Carlos André Medeiros 
Lamin, provided useful insights on the municipality’s experience with the two tools applied, the LG-SAT (in 
October 2018) and the Preliminary Scorecard (in December 2018):
“The preliminary version of the Scorecard was of paramount importance for the construction and development of the municipality’s Local Resilience Plan in 2019. Many other actions were undertaken, such as the organization of a contingent of Volunteer Civil Defence Agents for major events, the holding of a disaster simulation in 2019 involving several emergency agencies of the municipality, the inspection of hazardous sites and the management of hospitals for the maintenance of power generators, concrete actions with the Municipal Department of Public Works to improve Civil Defence infrastructure and eliminate flooding points during the rainy season, all in accordance with the Risk 
Mapping, which is reviewed annually.”
Respondents highlighted three main impacts of using the tools, which are aligned with the purpose of the 
MCR Campaign and Toolkit. Using the tools:
Facilitated decision-making processes in disaster risk reduction, especially by improving internal communication.
Guided the formulation of 
Local Plans and the implementation of disaster risk reduction actions afterward.
Increased public awareness regarding disaster risk reduction and provided a better understanding of local risks and issues of resilience.

[Page 15]
MCR Campaign – Systematization report for the Americas and the Caribbean 
The formulation of risk-informed urban master plans and up-to-date disaster scenarios
Under the coordination and technical advice of the Geological Survey of Brazil (CPRM) and the 
Institute for Technological Research (IPT), the municipality of Estancia Balnearia of Guarujá updated its Gravitational mass movement and floods susceptibility in 2016.
The Institute for Technological Research (IPT), together with the Mayor’s Office, prioritized the mitigation of vulnerabilities in existing homes. Their mapping process defined 14 high-risk areas (R3), in which 1644 vulnerable households are based. As a result, those areas were prioritized for disaster risk reduction actions. 
Increasing local knowledge on risk reduction has been fundamental to the revision of the master plans and other planning and territorial management tools (land use and land use planning, 
Municipal Risk Reduction Plan (PMRR), Preventive Civil Defence Plan (PPDC)). It also allowed to improve land use restrictions and avoid the emergence of new risk-prone areas, as well as to promote more resilient technical norms and practices in infrastructure development. Financial resources required by relocation programmes were also balanced, on the long run, by the establishment of a comprehensive door-to-door social assistance programme. 
Inspiring Practice #1: Guarujá (SP)
The survey also identified limitations faced by respondent cities in applying the MCR Toolkit (Figure 6), which allowed to better understand the causes of the low uptake rate by respondent cities. Overall, two types of difficulties arose:
(1) Difficulties related to institutional limitations at the local level. 
Numerous respondent cities highlighted their lack of human resources and capacity when trying to use the tools. Some mentioned a lack of financial resources, which is harder to understand, since UNDRR’s entire Toolkit is available free of charge and in open access to local governments. Respondent cities also indicated lacking municipal coordination, access to local risk data, proper equipment to operate the Toolkit, and even a lack of political support (although presumably this challenge was overcome with the enrolment in the Campaign). 
The organization of Capacity-Building Workshops and Training of Trainers (ToT) events by ROAMC has been an effective solution to tackle these insufficiencies. Designed by the Global Education and 
Training Institute (GETI), these workshops helped local governments strengthen their capacities by providing UNDRR expertise on site, promoting intersectoral coordination and dialogue, providing access to and a better understanding of local risk data, and favouring public awareness of and political commitment to the disaster risk reduction agenda.

[Page 16]
MCR Campaign – Systematization report for the Americas and the Caribbean 
In a large country like Brazil, these workshops were challenging due to the heavy logistics they required. 
Therefore, the national process of customizing the MCR Campaign Toolkit and methodology currently tested in Colombia might be of the utmost interest to Brazil, where state governments could be in a position to supervise and support the application of the Toolkit in their respective territories. The consolidation of a governance arrangement able to promote this type of multilevel coordination could represent a beneficial opportunity for the progress of the MCR Campaign in Brazil. (2) Difficulties related to the limitations of the MCR Campaign. 
The lack of information about the tools was the most frequently mentioned limitation by the responding cities. This calls for an improved communication strategy for the MCR Campaign. In Brazil, the lack of access to communication materials in Portuguese is also largely responsible for the low use of the tools. 
Building on this experience, and as part of MCR2030 activities in Brazil, the Regional Office for Disaster 
Risk Reduction has worked to produce technical and communication documents in Portuguese to better support local government engagement. 
When looking in more detail at the limitations faced by local governments in applying each tool separately, the Scorecard receives frequent comments on the complexity of its methodology. The technical language of UNDRR could be rephrased to become more accessible to local actors, regardless of their level of education and expertise in disaster risk reduction. Another request is to facilitate access to local risk data, given the multiplicity of sources and data currently available in academic research centres, private and public datasets, or international platforms such as DesInventar is not always obtainable.
Figure6. Limitations encountered by respondent cities to the Nov. 2019 survey in applying the MCR Toolkit
Lack of information regarding the existence of the tools
Lack of ﬁnancial resources
Lack of human resources
Lack of capacity /
Understanding of the tools
Administrative instability and lack of coordination
No translation of the tools to
Portuguese language
Lack of Risk Data
Lack of political willingness
Lack of equipments
The city developped its own tools
Recent inscription to the
Campaign

[Page 17]
MCR Campaign – Systematization report for the Americas and the Caribbean 
3. Planning for disaster risk reduction and urban resilience 
A Local Plan for Disaster Risk Reduction is a crucial document formulated by local governments - in a clear and accessible language - that provides operational guidance to implement the city’s strategic vision to become more resilient. Target E of the Sendai Framework calls for increasing the number of countries with a strategy and Local Plan for disaster risk reduction at national and local level. It constituted, therefore, a critical stage in the MCR Campaign’s action process.
In this regard, the results of our survey were satisfactory as almost half of the respondent cities (50/104) claimed to have formulated a Local Plan for the implementation of DRR actions in their municipality. The list of these 50 Brazilian municipalities is available in Annex 2.
An integrated and collaborative approach to disaster risk management and resilience planning
The resilience journey of Campinas started in 2003, after the municipality declared a state of emergency due to public calamity following a severe storm. In 2005, the Municipal Council of 
Campinas decided to carry out a Disaster Scenario Survey covering a period of 10 years and to organize the first capacity-building trainings for municipal agents. These initiatives marked a profound change in the action paradigm of the Municipal Department of Civil Defence in 
Campinas, which shifted from a reactive management of catastrophic episodes to a proactive management of risk reduction and disaster preparedness.
In 2012, the city enrolled in UNDRR’s Campaign “Making Cities Resilient: My City is Getting 
Ready!” and started designing a new organizational structure for risk management based on the Campaign’s methodology and technical toolkit for urban resilience (i.e., the 10 Essentials, the preliminary and detailed Scorecards, etc.). In 2013, a municipal decree established the 
Resilient City Committee as the new manager of the resilience agenda at the local level. Since then, the Committee has been promoting disaster awareness and preparedness workshops for all residents through the Civil Protection and Defence Training Centre (created the same year). 
Finally, the Committee installed the Campinas Disaster Management Centre in the premises of the Integrated Campinas Monitoring Centre (CIMCamp), which works in connection with the Emergency Management Centre of the state of São Paulo to send weather bulletins to 90 municipalities at the state level.
Through a collaborative and multisectoral approach, the Municipal Department of Civil Defence of Campinas further strengthened local cooperation with public agencies, private firms, academia and campineira communities. Together, they succeeded in making Campinas the first city in 
Brazil to validate a Local Plan for Resilience in 2017. The plan was formulated in full alignment with international agendas for sustainable development, including the New Urban Agenda and the local landing of the goals and priorities of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 
2015-2030.
Inspiring Practice #2: Campinas (SP)

[Page 18]
MCR Campaign – Systematization report for the Americas and the Caribbean 
The Director of the Municipal Department of Civil Defence in Campinas, Mr. Sidnei Furtado, who is also an advocate of the MCR Campaign in Brazil, has also been actively engaged in replicating this inspiring practice of risk reduction planning in other municipalities in the country. For example, municipalities neighbouring Campinas, such as Vinhedo (SP) and São José Do Rio Preto (SP), and in other states, such as Patos de Minas (MG), benefited from technical support from Campinas to also formulate a Local Plan for Resilience. 
Campinas has also lead knowledge exchanges with other cities and countries in the region; in 2019 representatives from Guayaquil, Tegucigalpa, Guatemala, and Colombia (as national disaster risk reduction entity) visited the city to learn from its experience.
Yet, a closer look at the details provided by the respondent cities highlights the need to improve alignment with UNDRR methodology for the formulation of Local Plans. For instance, some cities indicated that their 
Plan had no specific validity date or that its usage was permanent, which differs from UNDRR’s call for regular revision and updating. Some cities also seemed to mistake Local Plans for disaster risk reduction with emergency or contingency protocols. Finally, some municipalities (20% of the 50 cities) indicated that their Plan had been formulated without any explicit mention of the Sendai Framework, despite their theoretical alignment to it. 
As to why some municipalities have not yet formulated a Local Plan, all reported limitations regard unfavourable institutional settings (Figure 7), such as the lack of technical capacities, of human and financial resources, etc. The answer “not a priority in local affairs” is also worthy of further attention, as this point should have been resolved when the municipality joined the Campaign. 
Figure7. Limitations encountered by respondent cities to the Nov. 2019 survey in formulating 
Local Plans for DRR
Lack of capacity / knowledge
Lack of human resources
Not a priority in local affairs
Has not obtained political validation yet
Administrative instability and lack of coordination
Lack of ﬁnancial resources
Lack of equipment

[Page 19]
MCR Campaign – Systematization report for the Americas and the Caribbean 
Figure8. Types of DRR action implemented by respondent cities per MCR Essential (Nov. 2019)
Overall, these limitations, although deduced from only a few cases, highlight the need to consolidate the MCR Campaign’s monitoring capacities. To make progress in this regard, MCR2030 rolled out several solutions, including more frequent dialogue with local Focal Points to promote direct contact and verification of Local Plans, as well as the production of communication materials to engage municipalities in the new initiative.
4. Implementing concrete actions for disaster risk reduction and urban resilience 
Although necessary, formulating a Local Plan is not sufficient to make progress in building more sustainable and resilient cities. It is indeed fundamental that local governments assign the corresponding resources and mobilize the relevant actors to implement and comply with the measures for disaster risk reduction identified and defined in the action plan. The implementation of disaster risk reduction and resilience actions constitutes a decisive stage.
In this regard, more than half of the cities surveyed (54/104 respondents) claimed to have implemented disaster risk reduction actions in their municipality. The detailed list of all 54 Brazilian municipalities and selected actions is presented in Annex 3.
When analysing these actions and their relationship to the Ten Essentials for Making Cities Resilient1 (Figure 
8), four areas of implementation stand out: 
• Enhanced risk governance and disaster preparedness (Essentials 1 and 9);
• Increased data, knowledge and monitoring of local risks (Essential 2 and Priority 2 of the Sendai 
Framework);
• Urban infrastructure solutions (Essentials 5 and 8); 
• Awareness campaigns and capacity-building activities (Essentials 6, 7 and 9).
1 1. Organize for disaster resilience, 2. Identify, understand and use current and future risk scenarios, 3. Strengthen financial capacity for resilience, 4. Pursue resilient urban development and design, 5. Safeguard natural buffers to enhance ecosystems’ protective functions, 
6. Strengthen institutional capacity for resilience, 7. Understand and strengthen societal capacity for resilience, 8. Increase infrastructure resilience, 9. Ensure effective disaster response, 10. Expedite recovery and build back better 
E.1
E.2
E.3
E.4
E.5
E.6
E.7
E.8
E.9
E.10

[Page 20]
MCR Campaign – Systematization report for the Americas and the Caribbean 
Brazilian municipalities stand out for their considerable progress in improving disaster risk governance and preparedness. Contributions to Essential 1, on organizing for disaster resilience, Essential 6, on strengthening institutional capacity for resilience, and Essential 9, on ensuring effective disaster response, are often the result of institutional reforms aimed to train public officials and decision makers, as well as to operationalize resilience policies. As these trainings are local administration initiatives, they are easier to implement and reach a broad public in a short time.
Regarding disaster preparedness, Brazil carried many initiatives to modernize the functioning, capacities, and equipment of Municipal Department of Civil Defence. Several Brazilian municipalities formulated 
Response and Recovery Plans that included detailed evacuation procedures and early warning systems.
The Resilient Community project for enhanced risk governance and action implementation at the community level
The formulation of a Local Plan for Resilience in 2017 gave rise to a series of initiatives, such as the Resilient Community project, which seeks to understand and consolidate resilience issues at the community level, mainly by promoting the inclusion of senior citizens, women, people with disabilities, and children. 
Among the points to highlight in the Resilient Community project are:
→ a comprehensive municipal management plan for humanitarian assistance during disaster events, with the development of specific emergency protocols for women, children and adolescents, the elderly, people with disabilities, and animals; → the creation of a City Youth Council; → a Municipal Council for the rights of women; → a Municipal Council for the elderly; → a Municipal Council for the rights of persons with disabilities and a Reference Centre on the matter; → the creation of the Resilient City Observatory, a digital publication to promote local disaster risk reduction actions; → the creation of financial funds for the execution of public policies in disaster risk reduction, such as the Municipal Fund for the Rights of Children and Adolescents of Campinas or the 
Municipal Fund for the Elderly; → income transfer programmes for relocated households; and → the mapping of shelters in case of public emergencies and catastrophes.
In 2019, the considerable efforts undertaken by the Municipal Department of Civil Defence of 
Campinas to strengthen urban and regional resilience were rewarded with the Sasakawa Prize, awarded by the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNDRR) and the Nippon 
Foundation. The prize’s, 2019 edition recognized individuals, organizations and initiatives that contributed to ensuring the participation and inclusion without discrimination of all members of society, especially people living in poverty, in disaster risk reduction activities.
Inspiring Practice #3: Campinas (SP)

[Page 21]
MCR Campaign – Systematization report for the Americas and the Caribbean 
Strengthening the capacities of public officials and civil society also proved to be a crucial asset for 
Campinas’ rapid formulation of a strategy to cope with the COVID-19 pandemic. The municipality established, through decree n°20,766/2020, the Municipal Committee to Face New Human 
Coronavirus Infections. Drawing on Campinas’ extensive experience working with intersectoral committees, this Committee is composed of twenty Municipal Departments and Public Agencies and operates as an Emergency Operation Centre (COE). It adopted a command operating system to trigger intersectoral simultaneous and coordinated actions on different fronts to reduce the number of deaths and infections. To determine whether the adopted model is successful, the Committee developed the COVID-19 Observatory to produce indicators and evaluate Campinas’ integrated approach to tackling the pandemic.
Brazilian local governments also show considerable progress in Essential 2 related to risk knowledge, including urban risk mapping, disaster risk scenarios, and setting up monitoring and impact assessment platforms. They have demonstrated solid capacities in risk assessment and data management and dissemination of risk knowledge among local stakeholders. The latter has become a good practice specific to the country in comparison to other regions of the world (UNDRR, 2019), with initiatives in open data on risk exposure and vulnerability, community mapping of risk-prone areas and critical infrastructure, or digital innovations for knowledge sharing.
Local governments in Brazil also stand out for their important contributions to Essential 8, on resilient infrastructure, and Essential 5, related to natural buffers, with the development and maintenance of critical infrastructure, basic service networks, and ecosystem services. The mitigation of flood and landslide risks emerges as an important goal in this regard, especially in risk-prone areas. It includes appropriate infrastructure solutions for rainwater drainage and natural water retention, such as tree planting and the extension of linear parks along rivers, dam construction, river cleaning, and safety inspection routines of these facilities. 
Numerous awareness-raising campaigns and community training activities contribute to Essential 7, on understanding and strengthening societal capacity for resilience. The commitment to “leave no one behind” is crucial in this region, as it is one of the most unequal in the world, and Brazilian local governments have demonstrated effective community organization, social training, and civic engagement over the last decade. Several municipalities, like Campinas, have acted to consolidate participatory networks at the neighbourhood level through emergency, rescue and evacuation drills, management of temporary shelters and maintenance of early warning systems. 
A final positive point lies in the existence of some experiences of multilevel coordination for the implementation of disaster risk reduction actions, though only promoted by some subnational governments. As illustrated in the box below, evidence of good practices implemented by state-level actors, such as the state of São Paulo, in coordinating and supporting local-level actions for urban resilience, has guided reflections on the future framework for action for MCR2030.

[Page 22]
MCR Campaign – Systematization report for the Americas and the Caribbean 
A state-level governance scheme for the coherent strengthening of resilience at the municipal level
Following the adoption in 2012 of the National Policy for Civil Protection and Defence (PNPDEC), the state of São Paulo instituted the Natural Disaster Prevention and Risk Reduction Programme to elaborate an integrated strategy for disaster risk reduction, followed in 2013 by the enrolment of the state’s Department of Civil Protection in the MCR Campaign.
Since 2013, the state of São Paulo has invested in the state-level coordination of disaster management initiatives for all 645 municipalities under its authority. This has mainly implied the implementation of:
→ an Emergency Management Centre to monitor hydrological and geological risks and send weather bulletins and risk alerts to all 645 cities; → the São Paulo Alert Campaign, informing citizens on how to act in case of disasters; → the Training Centre in Civil Defence and Protection and the Volunteer Centre, with the help of the State Department for Social Development; → the state’s Integrated Management Plan for humanitarian assistance during disasters; → the Joint National Protocol for the Comprehensive Protection of Children, the Elderly and 
Persons with Disabilities in Situations of Disaster, with the State Department for Human 
Rights. 
In addition, the state of São Paulo provided direct political, financial, and technical support for municipal risk mitigation programmes and the formulation of local action plans. This included: → income transfer programmes and humanitarian aid for people affected by disasters; → priority access to public resources from the State Department of Civil Defence to municipalities that have developed a Local Plan for the execution of DRR actions; → the collaboration with the State University of Campinas (UNICAMP), particularly the 
Study Group on Land Management, Resilience and Sustainability (GEOTRES), for impact evaluations; → support for the implementation of the pilot project Global Campaign for Resilient Cities and the Safe Comprehensive School Programme, promoting safer education and the inclusion of resilience issues in school curricula; → the Resilient City Programme, enacted by state decree on December 12th, 2019, which establishes a platform for the mandatory monitoring, evaluation, and support of disaster risk reduction actions in 644 municipalities of the state, in association with the State 
Department for Infrastructure and Environment and the State Court of Auditors.
The state’s commitment to consolidating an integrated and coherent system approach to building resilience across its territory was rewarded with the title of Role Model State of the Campaign in 2014. 
Inspiring Practice #4: São Paulo State

[Page 23]
MCR Campaign – Systematization report for the Americas and the Caribbean 
Considering now the remaining challenges, we observe a predominance of Civil Defence and military actors in the DRR sector in Brazil, with few cases of coordination and horizontal partnerships between municipal sectors (Figure 9).
For instance, the lower number of actions related to Essential 4, on urban planning, can be explained by the few cases of coordination with municipal housing and/or urban planning departments. The numerous projects implemented in collaboration with municipal agencies for public works and infrastructure (Figure 
9) should pursue the integration of technical engineering solutions with risk-informed territorial thinking – which is a fundamental tenet of the MCR Campaign. However, the survey does not provide sufficient information in this regard.
In parallel, the few actions taken in relation to Essential 3, on financial capacity, and Essential 6, on institutional capacity, echo the limitations previously mentioned in Section 2 (Figure 10). It would imply that the gaps identified by those local governments are hardly converted into opportunities for action. 
Regarding the lack of financial resources, consolidating collaborative ties with the private sector and municipal agencies in charge of public finance in respondent cities should be of highest priority. 
In addition, the few actions undertaken under Essential 5 and the low degree of coordination with municipal departments for the environment shed light on the apparent difficulty to integrate Nature-Based Solutions and the agenda for Climate Change Adaptation into disaster risk reduction actions in Brazil.
Figure9. Actors responsible for DRR actions in respondent cities (Nov. 2019)
Civil Defence and Military ﬁreﬁghters
Mun Dpt. Public Works and infrastructure
Neighbourhood or Community associations, NGOs
Research facilities and/or
Academia
Mun Dpt. Environment
Mun Dpt. Education
Mun Dpt. Housing
Mun Dpt. Urban Growth and
Planning
State-level agencies
Public Schools
Private sector and/or public ﬁrms
Mun Dpt. Public Health
Mun Dpt. Human Rights
Federal-level agencies

[Page 24]
MCR Campaign – Systematization report for the Americas and the Caribbean 
Finally, despite the numerous awareness campaigns and community training actions that contributed to Essential 7, the mapping of responsible actors indicates only a few cases of bottom-up participation from neighbour and civil society associations (rather than the top-down training of residents by municipal authorities). 
While Civil Defence leadership has been beneficial to establishing the disaster risk reduction agenda in 
Brazil, local government capacities in project management, budget consolidation, progress monitoring, territorial planning, etc., could also benefit from wider partnerships between municipal spheres. 
A cross-cutting objective of the MCR2030 initiative is to facilitate dialogue between disaster risk reduction agencies (in Brazil, Civil Defence departments, either State or municipal) and other stakeholders to improve coordination and create synergies for effective resilience actions.
Figure10. Limitations encountered by respondent cities in implementing DRR actions (Nov. 2019)
Lack of responible entity for 
DRR agenda
Lack of implementing partners
Lack of human resources
Lack of or deﬁcient equipments
Lack of capacity
Lack of political willingness
Lack of coordination and/or continuity in public action
Lack of sensibilization on the issue
Lack of ﬁnancial resources

[Page 25]
MCR Campaign – Systematization report for the Americas and the Caribbean 
5. Building local capacities for disaster risk reduction via technical workshops and city-to-city exchanges 
The important contributions to Essential 6, on strengthening institutional capacity, and Essential 
7, on strengthening societal capacity are among the major outcomes of the MCR Campaign in Brazil over the last decade. The two Essentials aim at increasing local disaster risk reduction skills within municipal administrations and grassroot community organizations. Brazilian local governments show their understanding of the benefits of mobilizing and training residents and civil servants at an early stage. 
This training translates into broader support for resilience planning and action implementation.
In many Brazilian cities participating in the MCR Campaign, this capacity-building process has been iterative and steady, starting with small-scale initiatives that were systematized and mainstreamed by municipal decree (e.g., in Campinas and Curitiba).
Public awareness and capacity-building programmes at the neighbourhood level to spread the culture of resilience
Since 2005, Curitiba’s Municipal Coordination of Protection and Civil Defence (COMPDEC) has carried out a wide range of public awareness and training programmes at neighbourhood level, in partnership with the Municipal Department of Education and the Municipal Department of 
Social Defence. 
The residents of Curitiba benefited from five programmes: → Knowledge is Prevention, which prepares educational institutions to face emergency situations; → Civil Protection at Home, which raises risk awareness to prevent domestic accidents; → Community Hubs for Civil Defence and Protection, which organizes prevention workshops and public consultations in neighbourhoods located in areas at risk; → The delivery of Training and Orientation in Disaster Resilience courses, which are available to all residents; → The Plan for Mutual Help in the Industrial City of Curitiba, which carries out disaster simulations in industrial facilities, in addition to organizing talks and resilience courses for local companies.
The design process started with a pilot project in 2005 at the Mirazinha Braga school. It then expanded. By 2014, a municipal law validated the continuity and extension of the Programme to all schools across Curitiba based on the assessment of the positive impact of the pilot version. 
These programmes have trained more than 750 000 teachers and students since 2005. They have also created 42 Community Hubs for Civil Defence and Protection, which delivered capacitybuilding activities to 2,817 people in 2018. Private sector engagement was also guaranteed by the participation of 23 companies to the disaster drills organized under the Plan for Mutual Help in the industrial city of Curitiba.
Inspiring Practice #5: Curitiba (PR)

[Page 26]
MCR Campaign – Systematization report for the Americas and the Caribbean 
The Making Cities Resilient Campaign also promoted city-to-city exchanges as an opportunity to strengthen the cities’ network, expand their technical knowledge base, and sustain their commitment to implement effective actions to build urban resilience. 
Over the last decade, local governments in Brazil have proactively sought to enhance knowledge in multiple city-to-city initiatives for knowledge-sharing and policy transfers with the purpose of: 
• promoting peer-to-peer learning among MCR Campaign partners through the socialization of experiences, good practices and lessons learned; 
• strengthening the regional network of cities committed to disaster risk reduction; 
• showcasing the progress made in implementing MCR Campaign tools, methodologies, and approaches; 
• strengthening capacities in the region to technically accompany the processes of formulating disaster risk reduction plans at the local level and implementing actions that strengthen urban resilience.
Promoting peer-to-peer learning among MCR 
Campaign partners through the socialization of experiences, good practices and lessons learned.
Over the last decade, local governments in Brazil have proactively sought to enhance knowledge in multiple city-to-city initiatives for knowledge-sharing and policy transfers with the purpose of: 
Strengthening the regional network of cities committed to disaster risk reduction. 
Showcasing the progress made in implementing MCR Campaign tools, methodologies, and approaches.
Strengthening capacities in the region to technically accompany the processes of formulating disaster risk reduction plans at the local level and implementing actions that strengthen urban resilience.

[Page 27]
MCR Campaign – Systematization report for the Americas and the Caribbean 
From November 2015 to January 2016, three events (Table1 below) were held in Brazil under the project 
Technical Assistance Exchanges between Local Governments: Development and Strengthening of Capacity for Resilience Building, organized by UNDRR-ROAMC and the European Commission’s Directorate-General for European Civil Protection and Humanitarian Aid Operations (ECHO) through its Disaster Preparedness 
Programme (DIPECHO), and supported by USAID Office of U.S. Disaster Assistance (OFDA). The central objectives of these exchanges were to establish contact between local governments that shared similar challenges and experiences, and to identify opportunities for future collaboration in resilience building. 
Two main results derived from the exchange. After cooperation links were established between the participants of the cities involved, other collaborative and joint activities were conducted in the medium term. Additionally, disaster risk reduction efforts and works in each municipality improved. Table 1 presents the products derived from these exchanges.
Another city-to-city knowledge exchange took place in Campinas (São Paulo, Brazil) between December 
11 and 12, 2019. The event was attended by the Director of the Municipal Department of Civil Defence of Campinas, the Coordinator of the Municipal Unit for Comprehensive Risk Management in Tegucigalpa (Honduras), the Logistics Advisor of the Emergency Prevention Operations Centre of the Municipality of 
Guatemala City (Guatemala), the Director of Risk Management and Cooperation of Guayaquil (Ecuador), and a representative from the National Unit for Disaster Risk Management of Colombia.
Participants highlighted the comprehensive and collaborative approach adopted by these cities to advance their disaster risk reduction efforts. They also emphasized the necessity to establish links between actors from different backgrounds and with complementary expertise so that they can play a role in consolidating urban resilience in the most efficient way. Finally, they stressed the benefits of making information accessible and of direct awareness-raising activities for city dwellers, notably using social media and a clearly defined municipal communication strategy on disaster risk.

[Page 28]
MCR Campaign – Systematization report for the Americas and the Caribbean 
Table1. 
City-to-city exchanges organized in Brazil (Nov. 2015 to Jan. 2016)
Date
Partner Cities
Main Topics
Products
18/11/2015 to 
20/11/2015
Rio de Janeiro /
Petrópolis, Brazil
San Martín, 
Argentina
Essential 1: Enhanced institutional and administrative framework
Essential 7: Training delivery, social education, and public awareness
Essential 9: Preparedness, early warning, and effective responses
- Awareness Methodology in Flood Risk 
Management, document adopted by the Municipality of San Martin, updated with good practices identified during the exchange.
- Guidelines for promoting and strengthening community participation in the Early Warning System, updating and improving the Network of 
Volunteers for Emergencies and identifying specific actions for active involvement of young people and adolescents. 
- Proposal for the involvement of nonformal educational centres (Gardens, 
Community Day Care Centres, and 
Municipal Youth Centres).
25/10/2015 to 
30/10/2015
Campinas, Brazil 
Diadema, Brazil
Essential 
1: 
Vertical and horizontal integration of normative frameworks for disaster risk reduction
Essential 2: Risk Knowledge dissemination
Essential 9: Preparedness, early warning, and effective responses
- Alignment of Diadema’s Local Plan for 
Disaster Risk Reduction with the Sendai 
Framework and the National System for 
Civil Protection and Defence.
- Policy transfers on pedagogical materials for social education, updating of risk mapping, and equipment for disaster preparedness.
13/10/2015 to
15/10/2015
Santa Leopoldina, 
Brazil
Manaus, Brazil
Essential 7: Training delivery and community participation in risk reduction
- Knowledge transfers on good practices that contribute to developing sustainable cities and reducing disaster risk.
- Review of all executed proposals for risk planning and opportunities for upscaling.
- 
Better understanding of how communities interact with public authorities and cultural differences in risk governance.

[Page 29]
MCR Campaign – Systematization report for the Americas and the Caribbean 
Main lessons learned to continue building urban resilience in Brazil 
The MCR Campaign closed at the end of 2020 and partners and member cities worldwide pledged to develop a follow-up programme to move beyond advocacy and awareness raising. Making Cities Resilient 
2030 (MCR2030), the initiative succeeding the Campaign, responds to this growing need. Building on the successes and remaining challenges of the previous decade of advocacy work, new partnerships and delivery mechanisms will be used to move from advocacy to implementation, so that cities tangibly and measurably improve their resilience to risk. 
Below are the key lessons drawn from a decade of resilience building in Brazil under the MCR Campaign. 
Brazilian cities will promote further actions in disaster risk reduction by local governments and guide the transition strategy towards MCR2030. 
1. Local governments need incentives to sustain their engagement with MCR beyond enrolment 
One key factor in the success of the MCR Campaign in Brazil was its low barrier to entry, allowing any committed local government to join regardless of the progress already made in disaster risk reduction. 
Mayors joined the Campaign by adhering to the Ten Essentials and sending a letter of intent signed by the highest relevant authority to one of UNDRR’s regional support teams.
Nevertheless, the declining commitment of Brazilian local governments over the years – whether due to shifting political priorities or turnover in local administrations (when not appointing a new focal point for disaster risk reduction, for example) – challenged the efforts of the MCR Campaign. 
To address these concerns, the MCR2030 initiative provides regular incentives along its Resilience Roadmap for local governments in Brazil and worldwide to sustain their engagement. The MCR2030 Dashboard is a useful resource that provides effective monitoring mechanisms for local and national governments to track their progress and follow the MCR2030 guidelines to advance from one stage to the next. 
2. Local governments will benefit from a more intuitive and accessible communication strategy on the MCR framework 
Many local governments in Brazil have reported their difficulty in translating the MCR Campaign terminology and action framework into a narrative that is adapted to their own realities and is accessible to all stakeholders – from public servants to private sector partners and most vulnerable populations. 
This highlights the crucial need for an effective and informative communication strategy under MCR2030. 
It includes ensuring that the sequencing of a city’s resilience journey in different phases is well understood, together with the opportunities to advance from one stage to the next along the Resilience Roadmap.

[Page 30]
MCR Campaign – Systematization report for the Americas and the Caribbean 
3. Achieving significant participation of Brazilian local governments requires an intermediary level of coordination 
4. A richer diversity of stakeholders needs to be involved in 
Brazil for risk reduction planning and action implementation 
Enhanced communication and community engagement strategies are also key to strengthening social capacities for resilience at the grassroots level. Despite progress in strengthening the capacities of vulnerable groups and social networks, several cities in Brazil scored low on engaging with private sector companies and still lack awareness and social training programmes.
Finally, Brazil faces a specific difficulty, namely the lack of access to communication materials and technical tools translated into Portuguese, despite being the largest national partner of the MCR Campaign worldwide in terms of registered municipalities. Breaching this gap has become a priority under MCR2030.
 
Promoting cooperation between national and local governments as well as coherence between their respective strategic frameworks will build a favourable institutional setting for local resilience actions. 
It will also tackle the lack of coordination and communication between disaster management agencies at all levels, as well as the inadequacy of local governance schemes reported by many cities in Brazil. 
Federal and state institutions in Brazil can thereby play a crucial role in providing legislative powers to local governments, as well as budgetary and technical support. Given the high number of municipalities that participated in the MCR Campaign in Brazil, a multilevel coordination structure will also be more effective and impactful. A great opportunity exists for state governments to become intermediary Focal Points for the smooth coordination of MCR2030. 
The implementation of national disaster risk reduction strategies nonetheless hinges on the ability to translate and adapt national priorities to local realities and needs. The MCR2030 Department thus plays a key role in promoting dialogue between responsible authorities, defining roles and responsibilities, and sharing skills and knowledge among stakeholders.
The disaster risk reduction and resilience agenda has the particularity in the Americas and the Caribbean of being largely dominated by Civil Defence or military actors. Brazil is no exception, with too few cases of multisectoral coordination and integrated approaches to risk governance. 
A core principle of MCR2030 is to provide a platform (the Dashboard and the Marketplace) to help cities strengthen their ability to create partnerships, make their procurement processes more efficient and enable them to find specialized service providers for a wide array of actions.
As MCR2030 is the result of an extensive co-creation process between strategic partners at global and regional level, participating cities will have access to a richer set of methodologies, intellectual and technical resources, as well as networks of potential partners. For Brazilian local governments, regional supporting

[Page 31]
MCR Campaign – Systematization report for the Americas and the Caribbean partners include: the Global Resilient Cities Network (GRCN), Local Governments for Sustainability (ICLEISouth America), the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC), the Japan 
International Cooperation Agency (JICA), United Cities and Local Governments (UCLG), the United Nations 
Human Settlements Programme (UN-HABITAT), the United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS), and the InterAmerican Development Bank (BID), among many others. 
5. Financial support and partnerships for DRR are a priority for Brazilian local governments
6. Brazilian local governments actively engage in city-to-city exchange opportunities 
Many local governments in Brazil have demonstrated that they were fully able to identify what they needed to implement to foster urban resilience, but they often face limited and inconsistent financial capacity. A large part of this problem, besides conjunctural economic slowdowns, is due to poor resource allocation and inefficient budget planning in local administrations. This is particularly true, for instance, in cities where funds are disproportionately allocated to disaster-related relief and reconstruction initiatives, instead of mitigation and risk reduction practices. 
Massive investments in risk mitigation actions are not necessarily a factor for success. What matters are the strategic planning and appropriate disbursement of a city’s resources – however limited – in the short, medium, and long term, to achieve a lasting impact in resilience building. Securing an optimal budget for disaster risk reduction is therefore a number one priority for the decade to come.
The MCR2030 Dashboard is key to strengthening the ability of Brazilian local governments to access funds and connect with funding opportunities for resilience actions and initiatives. Efforts should mainly focus on overcoming organizational, capacity-building, and resources allocation challenges. This includes delivering training to help understand the financial dimension of risk management and the long-term economic benefits of investing in resilience actions. It will also require providing cities with the sufficient knowledge of approaches to attracting funds and funds and investors in resilience.
City-to-city knowledge exchanges in the Americas and the Caribbean have demonstrated that cities are the best teachers. Cities that are advanced in their resilience journey are best placed to mentor, advise, and support other local governments via horizontal knowledge exchanges. As such, cities are natural peer learning and accountability partners for other cities. They can help scale up what is working beyond the limits of small technical advisory pools. 
Over the last decade, Brazilian local governments have responded very well to intermunicipal exchanges at both national and international levels. This is a promising accomplishment for MCR2030 and its emphasis on building cooperation directly between its member cities. 
It is also an opportunity for the nomination of Resilience Hubs in Brazil to support other Brazilian local

[Page 32]
MCR Campaign – Systematization report for the Americas and the Caribbean governments. The MCR2030 Resilience Hub recognition will be awarded to cities that have already reached a high level of resilience building (stage C) and that show expertise and interest in disseminating best practices to other cities joining MCR2030. Since the launch of MCR2030, Campinas (SP) and Recife (PE) were recognized as ones of the first Resilience Hubs in the region, along Mexico City and Medellin.
Initiatives to be supported by twinned cities in Brazil may include: 
• hosting national and regional events related to MCR2030; 
• coordinating study tours to showcase practical examples;
• publishing and disseminating knowledge products; 
• providing access to partners who can support the journey of twinned cities along the Resilience 
Roadmap;
• injecting seed financing;
• and providing assistance with credit ratings and municipal bond market development.

[Page 33]
MCR Campaign – Systematization report for the Americas and the Caribbean 
Annex 1. Survey Form
Mapeamento dos avanços dos municípios brasileiros na 
Campanha Mundial: “Construindo Cidades Resilientes: minha cidade se está preparando!”
Com quase 1000 município inscritos à Campanha, os governos locais brasileiros representam o quarto dos participantes à Campanha em todos os continentes. Em consequência, os avanços das cidades brasileiras em matéria de redução do risco de desastres (RRD) podem ter um impacto colossal à escala global. 
Na perspectiva de fortalecer os laços de cooperação entre a UNDRR e os governos locais brasileiros, este questionário aponta o mapeamento da situação de cada município inscrito à Campanha em relação à formulação de um Plano Local de Ação para a Redução de Risco de Desastres e à implementação de boas práticas em resiliência urbana para serem compartilhadas com o resto da nossa plataforma.
*Obligatorio
1. Dirección de correo electrónico*
2. Nome do município*
3. Estado*
4. Nome completo do Ponto Focal *
5. Organização e Função *
6 E-mail *
7. Telefone *
DETALHES DA SUA CIDADE / GOVERNO LOCAL
DETALHES DE CONTATO DO PONTO FOCAL

[Page 34]
MCR Campaign – Systematization report for the Americas and the Caribbean 
8. Quais das Ferramenta desenhadas pela Campanha o seu município já aplicou? * 
Marca solo un óvalo.
9. Quais foram as dificuldades que não permitiram ao seu município aplicar todas as ferramentas da Campanha?
Aplicação das Ferramentas da Campanha
CASO NÃO APLICOU NENHUMA OU NÃO APLICOU TODAS AINDA:
CASO APLICOU O LOCAL GOVERNMENT SELF ASSESSMENT TOOL (LGSAT)
CASO APLICOU O QUICK RISK ESTIMATION TOOL (QRE)
Local Government Self-Assessment Tool (LG-SAT)
Quick Risk Estimation Tool (QRE)
Scorecard preliminar Scorecard detalhada 
Nenhuma
10. Quando foi aplicada a ferramenta?
 
11. Cómo avalia a sua satisfação em relação à utilidade desta ferramenta para seu município? Marca solo un óvalo.
12. Desc reve os aportes concretos da aplicação desta ferramenta para o seu município:
13. Quais foram as eventuais dificuldades encontradas durante a aplicação desta ferramenta?
14. Quando foi aplicada a ferramenta?
 
15. Cómo avalia a sua satisfação em relação à utilidade desta ferramenta para seu município? Marca solo un óvalo.
Inútil
Muito útil
Inútil
Muito útil

[Page 35]
MCR Campaign – Systematization report for the Americas and the Caribbean 
16. Descreve os aportes concretos da aplicação desta ferramenta para o seu município:
17. Quais foram as eventuais dificuldades encontradas durante a aplicação desta ferramenta?
18. Quando foi aplicada a ferramenta?
 
19. Cómo avalia a sua satisfação em relação à utilidade desta ferramenta para seu município? Marca solo un óvalo.
CASO APLICOU O SCORECARD PRELIMINAR
CASO APLICOU O SCORECARD DETALHADO
Inútil
Muito útil
20. Descreve os aportes concretos da aplicação desta ferramenta para o seu município:
21. Quais foram as eventuais dificuldades encontradas durante a aplicação desta ferramenta?
22. Quando foi aplicada a ferramenta?
 
23. Cómo avalia a sua satisfação em relação à utilidade desta ferramenta para seu município? Marca solo un óvalo.
Inútil
Muito útil
24. Descreve os aportes concretos da aplicação desta ferramenta para o seu município:
25. Quais foram as eventuais dificuldades encontradas durante a aplicação desta ferramenta?
Formulação de Planos Locais de Ação em Redução de Risco de Desastres
26. O seu município tem um Plano Local de Ação em Redução de Risco de Desastres formulado e validado? * 
Selecciona todos los que correspondan.
Sim

[Page 36]
MCR Campaign – Systematization report for the Americas and the Caribbean 
27. Quais foram as dificuldades que não permitiram ao seu município formular e/ou validar um Plano Local de Ação em Redução de Risco de Desastres?
28. Quando foi validado pelas autoridades locais?
 
29. Qual é o periodo de validade do seu Plano Local de Ação em Redução de Risco de Desastres?
30. O seu Plano está alinhado com as normas regionais e federais brasileiras? Selecciona todos los que correspondan.
CASO TIVER UM PLANO:
CASO NAO TIVER UM PLANO:
Implementação de Ações para a Redução de Risco de Desastres
Sim
Não
31. O seu Plano está alinhado com o Marco de Sendai 2015-2030? Selecciona todos los que correspondan.
Sim
Não
32. O seu Plano de Redução de Risco de Desastres está alinhado com outros Planos locais? Marca solo un óvalo.
Sim, com o Plano Diretor Sim, com um Plano sobre Mudança Climática Não Otro: 
33. Descreve o processo de formulação do seu Plano:
 
Detalhe as etapas chave do processo, os atores envolvidos, as metodologias empregada, e qualquer informação que gostaria de compartir, etc.
34. O seu município já implementou Ações para a Redução de Risco de Desastres? * Selecciona todos los que correspondan.
Sim

[Page 37]
MCR Campaign – Systematization report for the Americas and the Caribbean 
CASO AINDA NÃO TIVER IMPLEMENTADO AÇÕES
CASO JÁ TIVER IMPLEMENTADO AÇÕES
35. Quais foram as dificuldades que não permitiram ao seu município implementar ações para a Redução de Risco de Desastres?
36 Identifica as necessidades do seu município para a implementação futura de ações para a Redução de 
Risco de Desastres:
Identifica, por favor, a prática mais exitosa do seu município em Redução de Risco de Desastres que gostaría de compartilhar com o resto da nossa plataforma regional e mundial.
37. No que consiste essa ação?
38. Quem foram os atores chave dessa ação?
39. Descreve o processo de implementação dessa ação:
40. Quais foram as dificuldades encontrada durante este processo e cómo as superou?
41. Existe um monitoreo ou um trabalho de avaliaçao para essa ação? Selecciona todos los que correspondan.
Sim
Não
42 Quais foram os logros concretos dessa ação?
43. Explica como essa ação se vincula com a Campanha Mundial.
 
Pode apoiar sua resposta com os 10 essenciais da Campanha, as ferramentas ou workshops da 
Campanha, ou também as metas do Marco de Sendai, etc.
Por gentileza, compartilha conosco qualquer link o documento tendo informaçoes adicionais sobre a boa prática do seu município.
As informaçoes podem ser mandadas diretamente ao correio oficial da Campanha: ciudades@eird.org
Se enviará una copia de tus respuestas por correo electrónico a la dirección que has proporcionado
Con la tecnología de

[Page 38]
MCR Campaign – Systematization report for the Americas and the Caribbean 
Annex 2. List of respondent cities with Local 
Action Plans for DRR
State
City
Validation
Validity
Mato Grosso
Cuiabá
15/05/2011
Not defined in Plan
Minas Gerais
Além Paraíba
06/06/2019
Updated each year
Guaxupé
01/01/2018
Updated each year
Itanhomi
30/06/2017
Updated every 2 years
Januária
12/02/2019
Updated each year
Poços de Caldas
01/04/2019
Not defined in Plan
Paraná
Bom Jesus Do Sul
12/12/2017
Permanent
Cianorte
01/10/2019
Updated each year
Guarapuava
10/06/2019
Updated each year
Itaúna Do Sul
06/12/2019
Not informed in survey
Nossa Senhora das 
Graças
11/03/2017
Updated every 3 years
Querência do Norte
01/12/2015
Permanent
Pernambuco
Cortês
10/08/2018
Updated every 5 years
Jaboatão dos 
Guararapes
01/04/2019
Updated each year
Jaqueira
01/08/2014
Updated every 5 years
Rio de Janeiro
Itaocara
15/07/2019
Updated every 4 years
Valença
17/07/2019
Updated each year
Rio Grande do Sul
Estância Velha
30/10/2012
Updated every 5 years
Parobé
14/10/2018
Updated every 2 years
Santa Catarina
Barra Velha
30/01/2019
Updated each year
Criciuma
01/11/2017
Updated every 2 years
Rio Negrinho
19/02/2019
Not defined in Plan
São Paulo
Américo Brasiliense
22/03/2019
Updated every 2 years
Araras
01/01/2018
Updated each year
Artur Nogueira
01/01/2019
Updated each year
Avaré
Not informed in survey
Updated every 3 years
Batatais
05/12/2018
Updated each year
Bauru
01/02/2017
Not defined in Plan
Bebedouro
07/07/2014
Updated each year
Campinas
01/01/2019
Updated each year
Capivari
20/08/2018
Updated each year
Cruzália
Not informed in survey
Updated each year
Diadema
Not informed in survey
Updated each year
Guarujá
22/11/2018
Updated each year
Holambra
28/11/2019
Updated each year

[Page 39]
MCR Campaign – Systematization report for the Americas and the Caribbean 
State
City
Validation
Validity
Itapirapuã
01/04/2019
Updated each year
Itaquaquecetuba
Not informed in survey
Not informed in survey
Itararé
Not informed in survey
Not informed in survey
Lorena
25/02/2019
Updated each year
Matão
07/06/2017
Updated each year
Paulistânia
15/02/2018
Permanent
Pederneiras
08/02/2019
Updated each year
Salto
10/04/2019
Updated each year
Salto Grande
05/06/2017
Not defined in Plan
São José Do Rio Preto
01/12/2017
Not informed in survey
São José Dos Campos
01/12/2018
Updated each year
São Vicente
27/07/2019
Not defined in Plan
Sarapui
Not informed in survey
Not informed in survey
Vargem
03/01/2016
Not informed in survey
Vinhedo
01/08/2019
2017-2021
Total: 50 cities

[Page 40]
MCR Campaign – Systematization report for the Americas and the Caribbean 
Annex 3. List of respondent cities implementing DRR actions
State
City
DRR Action
Responsible actors
Mato Grosso
Cuiabá
Relocation of people living in risk-prone areas and prevention of urban and forest fires
Municipal Department of Civil Defence and 
Environmental Operations 
Group (GOA)
Conceição Do 
Mato Dentro
Emergency evacuation drills and awareness campaigns
Municipal agents and participation of local communities
Formiga
Risk mapping and community training 
Firefighters
Guaxupé
Study and delineation of an area where floods occur during rainy periods
Municipal Department of 
Civil Defence and residents of vulnerable areas
Itaguara
Stormwater drainage, guidance of the population through lectures and awareness campaigns
Municipal Department of 
Public Works and Municipal 
Department Civil Defence
Itanhomi
Local risk mapping
Municipal Department of 
Civil Defence
Jaíba
Infrastructure for water distribution
Municipal government and federal government
Município De 
Dona Euzébia
Risk monitoring and relocation sites
COMPDEC
Patos De Minas
Municipal decrees for the creation of an Integrated 
Regional Centre of Command and Control for joint disaster response, safety inspection operations against urban and forest fires, evacuation drills, creation of a Centre for study and research on disasters and climate change (ECE)
Firefighters and Municipal 
Department of Civil 
Defence
Poços De Caldas Disaster drills and 
Civil 
Defence training
Municipal Department of 
Civil Defence and Military 
Firefighters
São Geraldo Do 
Baixio
Prevention campaigns in schools, tree planting and measures to reduce flood risk
Municipal Departments of Civil Defence, Health, 
Education, Military Police, and volunteer residents

[Page 41]
MCR Campaign – Systematization report for the Americas and the Caribbean 
State
City
DRR Action
Responsible actors
Pará
São João De 
Pirabas
Recovery of secondary roads and unsafe housing collapse
COMDEC
Paraná
Almirante 
Tamandaré
River cleaning, social and environmental education campaign in schools and communities
Public sector, schools and local communities
Cianorte
Local risk mapping
Municipal Department of 
Civil Defence
Guarapuava
River cleaning, galleries cleaning and maintenance, environmental education 
Municipal government, in collaboration with communities and educational networks
Querência Do 
Norte
Equipment control and dam drainage 
Municipal government
Ribeirão Claro
River cleaning and voucher distribution
Municipal Department of 
Civil Defence
Pernambuco
Cortês
Urban gardens for risk mitigation, awareness campaigns in schools
Civil 
Defence 
Schools, 
Nupdecs
Jaboatão Dos 
Guararapes
Monitoring committee for reducing disaster risks, awareness campaigns in schools to teach students how to identify local hazards and implement preventive measures in their daily life
Municipal 
Departments of: 
Environment, 
Social 
Assistance, Infrastructure, 
Urban Services, Education, 
Health, Safety, Institutional 
Relations and Community 
Involvement
Rio De Janeiro
Cachoeiras De 
Macacu
Awareness campaigns in schools
Municipal Department of 
Civil Defence
Estado Do Rio 
De Janeiro
Development of resource management, information and operational control systems, regional meetings and workshops in schools, technical assistance to cities during disasters, promotion of local adherence to the technological systems created by State Department of Civil 
Defence
State Department of Civil 
Defence, state agencies, municipal agencies, private and philanthropic organisations
Magé
Awareness campaigns in riskprone areas
Municipal government, in collaboration with residents of risk-prone areas

[Page 42]
MCR Campaign – Systematization report for the Americas and the Caribbean 
State
City
DRR Action
Responsible actors
Rio Grande do Sul
Estância Velha
Infrastructure to reduce risk in flood-prone areas
Municipal Department of 
Public Works, Ministry of 
Environment
Parobé
Local risk mapping and relocation campaigns
Geological Survey of Brazil (CPRM) and Ministry of 
Urban Planning and Housing
Santa Catarina
Barra Velha
Civil 
Defence at school, training centres and training of civil protection community, volunteer training and awareness conferences
Headmasters, residents’ associations, NGOs, 
Churches
Criciuma
Channel infrastructure to reduce flood risk
Municipal Departments of 
Civil Defence, Public Works, and Environment
Rio Negrinho
Infrastructure to reduce the risk
Municipal Department of 
Civil Defence
São Paulo
Americana
Dam building works
State and Municipal 
Department of Civil 
Defence, State Institute for 
Technological Research
Araras
Local risk mapping
COMDEC and State Institute for Technological Research
Avaré
Public awareness campaigns
Technicians, Representatives from the Municipal 
Departments of Education, 
Environment, Agriculture
Batatais
Infrastructure to reduce flood risk
Municipal Government, 
Federal Government
Bauru
Using the terrama2 platform for monitoring meteorological and risk-prone areas
National Institute for Space 
Research
Bebedouro
Drainage infrastructure
Municipal Department of 
Public Works and SAAEB water provision company
Cajati
Normative alignment between the 
Municipal 
Departments of 
Urban 
Development, Environment, and Civil Defence to establish building permits that inhibit construction areas in hazard-prone areas and/or application
Municipal Departments of Urban Development, 
Environment and Civil

[Page 43]
MCR Campaign – Systematization report for the Americas and the Caribbean 
State
City
DRR Action
Responsible actors
São Paulo
Campinas
Creation of a Resilient City 
Committee, elaboration of a prospective disaster scenario on 10 years, creation of a 
Resilient City Observatory, installation of the Disaster 
Management Centre (CGD) in the Integrated Monitoring 
Centre Campinas (CIMCamp), implementation of the 
Resilient Community project
Municipal Departments of 
Education, Housing, and 
Civil Defence, Human Rights 
Committee of the Resilient 
City, UNICAMP, private sector, communities
Capivari
Prevention measures and emergency management
Municipal Department of 
Civil Defence
Diadema
Mapping of risk-prone areas and structural measures for mitigation
Municipal Department of 
Civil Defence (COMPDEC), 
Municipal Department of 
Housing and Public Works
Guarujá
Implementation of the 
Municipal Rainfall Network for monitoring and introduction of automatic electric field sensors
State and Municipal 
Department of Civil 
Defence, CEMANDEN and 
INPE
Itapolis
Local risk mapping
Municipal Department of 
Civil Defence, Municipal 
Department of Environment
Itaquaquecetuba Awareness campaigns within municipal departments
Municipal Department of 
Civil Defence 
Itararé
Cleaning currents through the town
Municipal Government 
Itatiba
Monitoring the presence of alligators, elaboration of erosion plan, revitalization of school spaces
Municipal Department of 
Civil Defence
Jaguariúna
Community awareness campaigns in high-risk areas
Not informed in survey
Jundiaí
Municipal reorganization and institutional capacity development to implement the resilience agenda
Municipal Department of 
Civil Defence
Lorena
Rainfall monitoring and environmental education programmes
Municipal Departments of 
Environment, Education, 
Public Works and Urban 
Planning Coordinator, Civil

[Page 44]
MCR Campaign – Systematization report for the Americas and the Caribbean 
State
City
DRR Action
Responsible actors
São Paulo
Paulistânia
Local risk mapping and relocation campaigns 
Civil society
Pindorama
Erosion containment works
Municipal government
Presidente 
Prudente
Appointment of the municipal coordinator for Civil Defence
Municipal Council, Mayor and Civil Defence
São José Do Rio 
Preto
Risk mitigation works and flood risk containment works
Municipal Department of 
Public Works
São José Dos 
Campos
Awareness campaigns and disaster prevention
Municipal government
São Vicente
Preparation of studies (on gravitational mass movement and floods susceptibility), ten containment and drainage works in the municipality with funding from the federal government
State Technology 
Research Institute and 
Municipal Departments of Civil Defence, Urban 
Development, and Housing
Tapiraí
Infrastructure to reduce the risk of flooding and landslides
Municipal government and Committee of the hydrographic basin of 
Ribeira de Iguape and Litoral 
Sul
Valinhos
Enrolment service for families in at-risk areas, community prevention, promotion of community-led initiatives, canalization works for running water
Municipal government, 
DAEV and Rotas Das 
Bandeiras
Vinhedo
Prevention and mitigation against non-structural and structural risks and disasters
Municipal Departments of Civil Defence, Public 
Affairs, State Institute for 
Technological Research, 
Geological State Institute, 
CPRM, State Department of 
Civil Defence
Total: 54 cities