[Page 1]
UN Common Guidance on Helping Build 
Resilient Societies

[Page 2]
The ﬁnancial support of the Government of Denmark in the preparation and publication of this Guidance is acknowledged with gratitude.
Disclaimer: The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Secretariat of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country or territory or of its authorities or concerning the delimitations of its frontiers or boundaries. The designations of country groups in the text and the tables are intended solely for statistical or analytical convenience and do not necessarily express a judgment about the stage reached by a particular country or area in the development process. Mention of the names of ﬁrms and commercial products does not imply the endorsement of the United Nations.
This publication may be freely quoted but acknowledgement of the source is requested. 
Citation: United Nations (2020), United Nations Common Guidance on Helping Build Resilient Societies, 
New York (UN).

[Page 3]
UN Common Guidance on Helping Build 
Resilient Societies
December 2020

[Page 6]
Foreword
Meanwhile, disasters and the impacts of climate and ecological changes continue to overburden humanitarian systems and undermine development gains: swarms of locusts are an unprecedented threat to food security; environmental degradation and biodiversity losses have reached crisis levels, putting our ecosystem’s life support functions in jeopardy; and the growing number of protracted humanitarian crises and conﬂicts are posing seemingly insurmountable hurdles to sustainable development and poverty reduction in some of the world’s poorest countries. 
Building resilience is a critical step towards achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the UN System has a key role as a convener of multiple actors working together to reduce the systemic risks that have become deeply ingrained in the functionality of our societies, as the COVID-19 crisis has demonstrated. This requires us to take bold and transformative action that will bring the world onto a more sustainable path. Building resilient societies that can deliver on the promise to leave no one behind and achieve peace and development is well articulated in the Secretary-General's 
Vision on Prevention. It brings hope for a brighter and safer future in which crises are proactively prevented and managed to save people’s lives, protect their livelihoods and contribute to the well-being of our societies and our planet. The dividends gained from resilience-building will free up critical resources for sustainable development and create a conducive environment for public and private sector investments that are risk-informed. 
These beneﬁts are needed more than ever in times of the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Supported by this Guidance, I urge the development, humanitarian and peace communities to work together towards building resilient societies - within the 
UN, within governments, with civil society, the private sector and other actors through a whole-of-society approach. 
Everyone can contribute their piece of the puzzle, so that we can better understand and address the links between biological, technological, economic, environmental, climate, disaster and conﬂict risks that are emerging in ways that have not been experienced before. I call especially on our UN Teams at country level to build on their convening role to strengthen a collective understanding and joined-up programming across multiple types of risks. 
This is a complex undertaking that must be grounded in integrated systems-thinking and management, and I am convinced that we will prevail if we remain committed to working together. 
Foreword 
The United Nations Common Guidance on Helping 
Build Resilient Societies (in short, UN Resilience 
Guidance) comes at a time when resilience is being pushed to its limits globally. The widespread health, socio-economic and other impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic are likely to reverberate long into the future, deepening existing inequalities, hunger and poverty and shrinking economies.

[Page 7]
Foreword
The UN Resilience Guidance offers to 
UN Teams a shared conceptual clarity on what resilience-building is and how to integrate a resilience lens through a suite of practical steps in their core analysis and programming processes such as the Common Country Analyses, the UN 
Sustainable Development Cooperation 
Frameworks, 
Humanitarian 
Response 
Plans, Refugee Response Plans, and Integrated Strategic Frameworks, among others. I ask you all to examine and apply these steps as relevant in your respective country contexts and, by doing so, help equip governments to do the same in their sustainable development efforts. 
The UN Resilience Guidance also helps realize the implementation of the reform of the UN development system, the 
Agenda for Humanity and many other international policy objectives. As such, it reinvigorates the UN System to better support countries in building the resilience and the solid foundations needed to achieve their aspirations for sustainable development, peace and prosperity.
Amina J. Mohamed
United Nations 
Deputy Secretary-General, 
Chair of the United Nations 
Sustainable Development Group
The UN Resilience Guidance offers to UN Teams a shared conceptual clarity on what resiliencebuilding is and how to integrate a resilience lens through a suite of practical steps in their core analysis and programming processes.
© Kate Jean Smith – UNDP

[Page 8]
Acronyms & Abbreviations
Acronyms & Abbreviations
CADRI
Capacity for Disaster Reduction Initiative Partnership
CCA
Common Country Analysis
CDA
Conﬂict Development Analysis
CEB
Chief Executive Board
COBRA
Community-Based Resilience Analysis
CRPT
City Resilience Proﬁling Tool
CRRF
Comprehensive Refugee Response Framework
CSO
Civil Society Organizations
DFID
Department for International Development
DPPA
Department of Peacebuilding and Political Affairs of the United Nations
DRF
Disaster Recovery Framework
DSRSG
Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General
EC
European Commission
ECOSOC
Economic and Social Council of the UN
EDRM
Health Emergency Disaster Risk Management Framework (WHO)
EU
European Union
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
FbF
Forecast-Based Financing
FSIN
Food Security Information Network
GA
General Assembly
GAR
Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction 
HCT
Humanitarian Country Team
HIV/AIDS
Human Immunodeﬁciency Virus/Acquired Immunodeﬁciency Syndrome
HLPF
High-Level Political Forum on Sustainable Development
HRP
Humanitarian Response Plan 
IAP
Integrated Assessment and Planning
IASC
Inter-agency Standing Committee
ICA
Integrated Context Analysis
IDDRSI
Drought Disaster Resilience and Sustainable Initiative 
IFAD
International Fund for Agricultural Development
IFI
International Financial Institution
IGAD
Inter-Governmental Authority on Development
IHR
International Health Regulations
INGOs
International Non-Governmental Organization
IPCC
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
ISF
Integrated Strategic Framework
JRA
Joint Resilience Action
LCRP
Lebanon Crisis Response Plan
LDC
Least-Developed Country
LGBTI
Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender and Intersex
MAPS
Mainstreaming, Acceleration Policy Support 
M&E
Monitoring and Evaluation

[Page 9]
Acronyms & Abbreviations
MIC
Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey
MIRA
Multi-Sector Initial Rapid Assessment
MSP
Minimum Service Package
NAP
National Adaptation Plan
NDC
Nationally Determined Contributions
NWOW
New Way of Working
ODI
Overseas Development Institute
OECD
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
OHCHR
Ofﬁce of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
OIEWG
Open-Ended Intergovernmental Expert Working Group
PDNA
Post-Disaster Needs Assessment
PKO
Peacekeeping Operation
PSNP
Productive Safety Net Programme
RBA
Rome-Based Agencies of the United Nations
R-CAP
Resilience Common Diagnostic Prioritization
RIMA
Resilience Index Measurement and Analysis
RPBA
Recovery and Peacebuilding Assessment
RSA
Resilient Systems Analysis
R-UNDG
Regional United Nation Development Group
SDG
Sustainable Development Goals 
SIDS
Small Island Developing States
SPM
Special Political Mission
TOC
Theory of Change
UN
United Nations
UNCT
UN Country Team
UNDESA
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs
UNDG
UNDP Development Group
UNDOCO
Development Operations Coordination Ofﬁce of the United Nations
UNDP 
United Nations Development Programme
UNDRR
United Nations Ofﬁce for Disaster Risk Reduction
UNEOSG
Executive Ofﬁce of the Secretary-General of the United Nations
UNFCCC
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
UNFPA
United Nations Population Fund
UNHABITAT
United Nations Human Settlement Programme
UNHCR
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
UNICEF 
United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund
UNOCHA
United Nations Ofﬁce for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
UNSDCF 
United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework 
UNSDG
United Nations Sustainable Development Group
UNWOMEN
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
WB
World Bank
WFP
World Food Programme
WHO
World Health Organization
WHS
World Humanitarian Summit
WMO
World Meteorological Organization
3RP
Syria Regional Refugee and Resilience Response Plan

[Page 10]
Executive Summary
Executive Summary
The COVID-19 pandemic and other large-scale disasters have shown that risk has become increasingly interconnected, with the impacts of shocks and disasters cascading across systems and sectors. This requires comprehensive and joined-up efforts to build resilience that can transcend a range of risks, sectors and stakeholders. 
Why is there a need for a 
UN Resilience 
Guidance?
What does the 
UN Resilience 
Guidance offer?
While there are positive signs of increased cross-sectoral collaboration, resilience is still largely built in institutional silos, focusing on speciﬁc types and drivers of risks, be they violent conﬂict, natural hazards, climate variability and change, gender inequality, poverty, human-induced hazards, epidemics or displacement. This 
Guidance aims to heal this fragmentation and to strengthen coherence in United 
Nations (UN) resilience-building efforts at country level in support of governments’ sustainable development objectives. A resilience lens is a prerequisite for achieving the ambitions of the 2030 
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Resilience is a common thread across the three United Nations (UN) pillars of development, human rights, and peace and security.
It provides a UN-wide reference on building resilience for delivering the 2030 
Agenda that is embedded in the UN reform and the Secretary-General’s Prevention 
Agenda. It is an operational guidance for practical application at country level that promotes a common understanding of resilience based on shared principles. It explains the process for building resilience together for the UN System and its partners and includes a rich annex of practical tools and methodologies. 
The UN Resilience Guidance offers a ﬂexible approach that can be tailored to country contexts and needs. It is not a blueprint but complements ongoing resilience-building efforts at country level by addressing gaps and bottlenecks towards a more comprehensive and joined-up action.

[Page 11]
Executive Summary
Who is the 
UN Resilience 
Guidance for?
It does this by bringing the UN together around a common understanding and operational approach on risk-informed programming across sectors. It can support the new generation of UN Teams in mission and non-mission settings and be a valuable resource for Resident and 
Humanitarian Coordinators. It can outline important partnerships with the Heads of political and peacekeeping missions as well as Heads and Deputy Heads of UN entities and strategic planners – particularly in settings where UN Security Council mandate frames UN activities under an integrated triple-hatted Deputy  Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator. In addition to this primary target audience, the Guidance is also a useful reference for government and partners at country, regional and global levels.
The drafting of the Guidance was informed by existing policies, initiatives, programmes, tools and operations, including the UN Chief Executive 
Board (CEB) Paper on Risk and Resilience. Through an extensive consultation process, country-level practices and experiences were condensed and translated into a step-by-step approach that can be ﬂexibly followed and adapted to foster resilience in different contexts and situations and at different points in a country’s development path. 
The primary audience of the Guidance are UN Teams, whom the Guidance seeks to help in their work to better equip governments at national and subnational levels to lead on resilience-building.
How was the 
UN Resilience 
Guidance developed?
How is resilience deﬁned? 
Resilience is the ability of individuals, households, communities, cities, institutions, systems and societies to prevent, resist, absorb, adapt, respond and recover positively, efﬁciently and effectively when faced with a wide range of risks, while maintaining an acceptable level of functioning without compromising long-term prospects for sustainable development, peace and security, human rights and well-being for all.

[Page 12]
Executive Summary
Investing in resilience helps prevent and curtail economic, environmental and human losses in the event of a crisis, thereby reducing human suffering and protecting development gains. Building resilience can also stimulate risk-informed economic activity through the diversiﬁcation of investments in businesses, households and livelihoods. Investments in resilience are beneﬁcial even if there is no crisis and can bring co-beneﬁts across many of the Sustainable Development Goals by focusing attention and resources where risks intersect. A resilience lens helps those who are most vulnerable and marginalized, ensuring that no one is left behind on the path towards sustainable development.
Resilience-building is relevant in a range of humanitarian, development and conﬂict-affected contexts and crises. Countries may experience a combination of these contexts in the same or several locations, making an integrated, whole-of society and whole-of-government, multi-sectoral and systems approach to resilience-building even more important in:
i. countries with great exposure and vulnerability to natural, biological and technological hazards and climate change impacts; ii. countries that are at risk of entering conﬂict, that are in it or that are emerging from it; iii. countries with protracted and/or recurrent humanitarian crises; and iv. regional contexts that experience trans-boundary risks, where challenges to resilience do not adhere to political and geographic boundaries.
Regardless of whether UN Teams are working at local, subnational, national, regional or global level, building resilience requires four elements for sustainable development, peace and security, human rights and the well-being of all: i. Understanding of the context and the multiple and interconnected dimensions of risk. Risks that can disrupt social, economic and environmental systems at local, subnational, national or regional levels, must be understood and analysed within speciﬁc political, socio-economic, and environmental contexts; ii. Recognition of how systems are interconnected. 
Resilience-building requires a systems approach based on the understanding that many adverse events are occurring across global, regional, national, subnational and local scales, with cascading effects among interconnected social, governance, economic, ecological and physical systems; iii. Inclusion of multiple stakeholders in a gender-responsive manner. Involving all relevant stakeholders guarantees that a broad range of perspectives on risk informs the process and ensures that the needs, including those of the most vulnerable, are addressed; iv. Presence of capacities for resilience. 
Systems, institutions and people are considered ‘resilient’ when they have absorptive, adaptive, anticipative, preventive and transformative capacities and resources to cope with, withstand and bounce back from shocks. 
What are the dividends and beneﬁts of resiliencebuilding?
In which contexts is resiliencebuilding relevant?
What are the key elements of resiliencebuilding?

[Page 13]
Executive Summary
How can joined-up programming for resiliencebuilding be achieved?
The resilience-building efforts of UN 
Teams are led by several common principles that will guide assessment, planning, implementation, coordination, partnering and learning. Each UN Team needs to be accountable for the consistent application, monitoring and evaluation of the principles for resilience-building:
The Guidance explains the process by which UN Teams can achieve joined-up programming for building resilience and highlights speciﬁc considerations when applying a resilience lens while programming together. 
1. Leave no one behind and reach those most in need and at risk in a gender-responsive manner.
2. Ensure equality, non-discrimination and a human rights-based approach. 
3. Be accountable for pursing inclusive partnerships. 
4. Do no harm. 
5. Engage and commit over the long term in a ﬂexible, yet strategic approach. 
6. Pursue context-speciﬁc and tailor-made approaches. 
7. Act early to prevent or mitigate crises. 
8. Build on local and national capacities for ownership and leadership.
Assessment 
Common understanding of risks and contexts. 
It is not always necessary to collect primary data on risk and resilience, which can be a time- and resource-intensive exercise. UN Teams can collect existing assessment results and evidence-based data sets. The analysis must be inclusive, highly participatory and gender-sensitive and engage all key stakeholders to ensure that a full range of perspectives is considered. The assessment needs to comprise: (i) the main hazards that may affect people and systems in the location considered; (ii) the relevant contextual factors and underlying economic, social, political and environmental drivers of risk in the location considered; (iii) the key systems at risk in the location considered and how the manifestation of risk in one system can have cascading impacts across others; and (iv) the population groups most at risk of being left behind. The results of the analysis should be based on a consensus that substantively drives UN Teams’ planning processes.
What are the shared principles for resilience-building?

[Page 14]
Executive Summary
Planning 
Joined-up planning for collective outcomes. 
Joined-up planning requires a broad, pragmatic and inclusive partnership-based approach to ensure that UN resilience-building efforts complement each other and come together in terms of location, beneﬁciaries and risks, including through sequencing and layering interventions across different sectors. Current 
UN planning tools and processes should form the starting point for UN Teams’ efforts to strengthen resilience. A coherent approach to resilience programming that spans development, human rights, humanitarian and peace interventions requires a shared vision and articulation of collective outcomes by a wide range of partners, including UN and non-UN actors. The risk and context assessment provides the evidence and the foundation for planning and should be jointly reviewed by UN Teams in order to reach consensus among humanitarian, development, human rights and peace stakeholders on the priority risks and ensure that there are no gaps in the assessment. 
UN Teams can then agree on a shared problem statement and on collective outcomes that are strategic, clear, quantiﬁable and measurable. A range of tools, including the Theory of Change (TOC), can help to formulate collective outcomes and results chains. 
Implementing 
Acting together for building resilience. 
Assessing, analysing and understanding multiple risks across and within systems are crucial for driving collaborative implementation of programmes and projects and for supporting national and local policy-setting. Working together on shared analysis and planning processes helps to forge synergies and partnerships between different actors in one location or one sector or several interconnected systems (e.g., food security, water and health).
Monitoring 
Measuring the impact of resilience-building.
Monitoring resilience is best pursued as part of the UN’s wider M&E efforts that are fully integrated into SDG-related monitoring and reporting. M&E frameworks should take stock of any changes in risk patterns and resilience of people and economic, social and environmental systems using quantitative and quantitative indicators. Monitoring also needs to move beyond conventional methods and approaches and consider some speciﬁc elements, including the facts that:
i. the impact of resilience-building support may not be apparent for decades; ii. the causal linkages between resilience-building support and the observed change are unlikely to be linear; and iii. there are difﬁculties in measuring the impact of an intervention in the absence of a hazard or threat. Depending on the type of indicator chosen, different data collection methods for monitoring resilience are available, including quantitative, qualitative, objective and subjective approaches.

[Page 15]
Executive Summary
How can we partner, coordinate and ﬁnance for building resilience?
Resilience-building is most effective when multi-agency actions are layered and sequenced across multiple sectors. It is important to involve communities and local actors as well as the public and private sectors and to allow for converging efforts of humanitarian, development, and peace and security sectors. 
Partnering 
Partnerships for resilience-building are essential for developing joined-up solutions and a shared understanding of risks and contexts, for motivating collaboration and for learning and adapting together. UN Teams need to know how to leverage their respective agencies’ expertise, which additional stakeholders to involve and what their respective roles in building resilience are. 
Coordinating 
Coordination for resilience-building should be under the leadership or co-leadership of the government authority. Coordination for resilience-building is best integrated into already-existing coordination forums, platforms or clusters in order to avoid redundancy of mechanisms and to save time and resources. Since resilience-building needs to occur across scales, sectors and regional, subnational, local and urban coordination mechanisms must be identiﬁed and strengthened. In many country contexts, several coordination mechanisms can coexist.
Financing for resilience
A major obstacle to accessing ﬁnances for resilience is the fragmentation of international funding, which lies beyond the direct inﬂuence of UN Teams. Nevertheless, the UN can make a substantial difference: Its $26 billion funding for operational activities can, if risk-informed, help secure the $2.5 trillion needed annually to meet the SDGs by 2030. UN Teams can choose a broad variety of actions, such as: i. fostering greater understanding of the costs and beneﬁts of resilience-building; ii. helping governments build their capacities to unlock public and private sector ﬁnancing that is risk-informed; iii. advocating with donors on the importance of funding resilience-building across humanitarian-, development- and sustaining peace-related activities; iv. helping countries to mobilize and align all ﬁnancing ﬂows with national sustainable development priorities, in a risk-informed manner, through Integrated National Financing Frameworks (INFFs); v. partnering with other stakeholders to access pooled funds in support of comprehensive resilience-building efforts;

[Page 16]
Executive Summary vi. engaging with IFIs and other donors to embrace ﬂexible funding mechanisms such as ‘crisis modiﬁers’ and multiyear humanitarian/emergency funds; and vii. supporting forecast-based ﬁnancing in support of early action, preparedness and pre-planned community and other action before an emergency occurs. 
What is the way forward for the 
UN Resilience 
Guidance?
Users of the Guidance should develop new thinking and approaches and share their experiences within and across sectors or systems. This can establish a community of practice on resilience and help the UN System to facilitate research, learn and adapt to advise and support resilience actions at scale and in most-vulnerable locations for sustainable development impact, peace and prosperity for all. The Guidance is considered a living document that may need further adjustment to beneﬁt from country-level innovation and new solutions to resilience-building. 
Innovation is crucial for resilience, equality and forging forward-looking and risk-informed policies and strategies in the context of COVID-19, the climate crisis and the broader risk environment at local, national, regional and global levels.

[Page 18]
Introduction
Resilience is also a common thread across the three United Nations (UN) pillars of development, human rights, and peace and security1 – and is reﬂected in many important global policy agendas and frameworks2 that acknowledge that risks and their manifestation can hinder the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the 
Sustaining Peace Agenda. While the global policy frameworks articulate the importance of resilience in achieving sustainable development and peace in various sectors, contexts and scales, they have largely been implemented in institutional silos, focusing on speciﬁc types and drivers of risks, be they violent conﬂict, natural hazards, climate variability and change, human-induced hazards, epidemics and displacement, among others. The systemic nature of risks, their interlinkages and compounding effects are often not considered or understood.3 
The 
COVID-19 pandemic, with its far-reaching impacts on poverty, inequality and economic downturn that extend far beyond the health sector, has been a stark reminder of the blind spots in our understanding of how risks interconnect. 
Against this backdrop, the UN Resilience 
Guidance provides a timely reference for the implementation of the UN socio-economic, health and humanitarian response framework to COVID-19 to ensure that a comprehensive and multi-dimensional approach to risk and resilience appropriately informs the ‘new normal’ during and after the COVID crisis.4
Fragmentation across the national and international systems, including the 
UN, impedes building resilience for the whole of society and realizing the ambitions of the global, regional and national policy frameworks.
The continued separation of humanitarian, development, human rights and peace and security action, and the lack of attention to risk-informed programming, prevention and risk management, are the main challenges. In addition, the fragmentation in the international funding architecture has fostered a reliance on short-term solutions that address symptoms rather than root causes of risks. The human suffering and ﬁnancial costs of this way of working have become unsustainable. More joined-up5 solutions are needed that build on the comparative advantages of humanitarian, peace and security, development, and human rights interventions and collaboration around collective outcomes.
To strengthen coherence in UN resilience-building efforts at the regional, country and local levels, the Deputy Secretary-General tasked the Climate Principals to develop a UN resilience framework, with UNDP as the lead entity, for approval by the UNSDG. 
1.1 Background
Over the past decade, building resilience has emerged as an important means to prevent, prepare for, respond to and recover from crises associated with a range of threats to people’s lives, livelihoods and overall sustainable development. 
The systemic nature of risks, their interlinkages and compounding effects are often not considered or understood.

[Page 19]
Introduction
The framework was to cover all types of hazards and risks and promote greater collaboration and joined-up efforts of all actors of the UN System.6 This guidance also builds upon the earlier decision of 
UN Climate Principals to establish a UN inter-agency drafting team to develop the framework under the UN Secretary-General’s Climate Engagement Strategy.7 
The UN inter-agency drafting team comprised of technical leads appointed at the level of Senior Director8 to guide the drafting and was supported by a core group of senior technical specialists.9 The work of the core group built on existing policies, initiatives, programmes, tools and operations, including the Chief Executive Board (CEB) Paper on Risk and Resilience,10 and the Regional UNDG Strategic 
Framework to Support Resilient Development in Africa.11
The UN Resilience Guidance provides a UN-wide reference and guidance on building resilience for delivering the 
2030 Agenda that is embedded in the 
UN reform and the Secretary-General’s 
Prevention Agenda.12
The document also promotes a common understanding of resilience that is based on shared principles and offers operational and practical guidance for the 
UN System and its partners. It aims to achieve coherence among existing normative frameworks across the UN System13 and to integrate a resilience lens into all decisions, programmes and interventions and existing UN policy and programming processes rather than establish new or stand-alone UN policy or action plans for resilience.
The enhanced UN support to resilience-building is an essential component of core programming for achieving and securing sustainable development and peacebuilding outcomes.
The UN General Assembly, its Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) and the 
High-Level Political Forum (HLPF) on Sustainable Development support resilience through regular and systematic oversight of the way resilience and the implementation of the 2030 Agenda as whole are moving forward at the global, regional and country levels. Resilience is also a guiding principle of the UN Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF) and Common Country Analysis. The 
UNSDCF companion package calls for 
UN Teams14 to more effectively support national and regional resilience-building efforts, and to adopt a comprehensive risk management approach to reduce risks and help prevent all types of crises. 
As such, the UN Common Guidance on 
Resilience can support the new generation of UN Teams in mission and non-mission settings and be a valuable resource for Resident and Humanitarian Coordinators, and outline important partnerships with the Heads of political and peacekeeping missions, as well as Heads and 
Deputy Heads of UN entities and strategic planners – particularly in settings where UN security council mandate frames UN activities under an integrated triple-hatted DSRSG/RC/HC. Apart from 
UNSDCFs, the UN Resilience Guidance will also be applicable in the context of multi-year Humanitarian Response Plans, 
Refugee Response Plans, Integrated Strategic Frameworks, and mission transition processes, among others. It will also be useful for all member countries and partners who are engaging with the UN in support of resilience-building for delivering on sustainable development and peace and prosperity for all, while leaving no one behind.
The UN Common Guidance on Resilience can support the new generation of UN Teams and be a valuable resource for Resident and Humanitarian Coordinators, and outline important partnerships with the Heads of political and peacekeeping missions.

[Page 20]
Introduction
Through the UN Resilience Guidance, 
UN Teams will be able to better equip governments at national and subnational levels to lead on resilience-building, wherever possible, by bringing the 
UN together around a common understanding and operational approach on risk-informed programming across sectors. The UN’s resilience-building efforts are not pursued as a stand-alone goal but are prerequisites for achieving the SDGs and other global policies, fully aligned with national development plans and priorities. 
The drafting of the UN Resilience Guidance beneﬁted from a bottom-up approach by conducting:
i. country consultations with UN entities, governments and partners in Ethiopia, Jamaica, Lebanon and the Philippines (representative of contexts that display a wide variety of types of hazards, vulnerabilities, capacities and their interlinkages);15 ii. an online survey in which 21 organizations from 18 countries participated; and iii. ﬁeld tests that were conducted in Ethiopia and South Sudan and in the context of the Syria Regional Refugee and 
Resilience Plan. The document also reﬂects experiences from the COVID19 pandemic and risks associated with disease outbreaks.
The document also reﬂects experiences from the COVID-19 pandemic and risks associated with disease outbreaks.
Situating Resilience in Related Policy Frameworks, Strategies and Tools
R e si li e n c e in te gr at e d a cr o ss t h e fr a m e w or k s
T h e p il l a r s o f 
U n it e d 
N a ti o n s
Humanitarian Development Peace Nexus (New Way of Working)
UN Reform
Mainstreaming, Acceleration and Policy Support (MAPS)
G lo b al P ol ic y 
Fr a m e w o rk s
Paris
Agreement
World
Humanitarian
Summit
Sendai
Framework
New Urban
Agenda others…
Human
Rights
Peace and
Security
Development
UNSDCF
HRP
ISF
Human
Rights
Peace and
Security
Development
Risk informaed
2030
Agenda
National 
Development
Plan
SecretaryGeneral
Prevention 
Agenda
N at io n al P ol ic y a n d 
P ro g ra m m in g 
Fr a m e w o rk s
R e si li e n c e in te gr at e d a cr o ss t h e fr a m e w or k s
Accelerate coherence and convergence of action
Mutually reinforcing approaches & entry points
Global Context
Country Context

[Page 21]
Introduction
Introduction on the background for developing this UN guidance, the methodology for preparing it, an overview of the global policy context in which it is situated, and a brief guide to the reader to the different sections. 
Why Resilience Matters provides the rationale for resilience-building as a prerequisite for achieving sustainable development, peace and prosperity for all and introduces the dividends of building resilience and its relevance in a variety of contexts. 
What is Resilience provides a common conceptual basis for resilience upon which the UN Teams can build their joined-up efforts. 
How to Build Resilience Together then uses the conceptual framework to provide practical step-by-step guidance on how to foster resilience at local, country and/or regional levels through joined-up and comprehensive risk assessments, risk-informed planning, implementation and monitoring across systems and sectors that is grounded in and guided by a set of shared principles. 
Partnering, Coordinating and Financing for Resilience-Building provides further insights on how the members of UN Teams can better collaborate and forge partnerships to produce collective results for building resilience, including for resource mobilization. 
The Way Forward summarizes some of the essential next steps that would ensure that the Guidance is institutionalized across the UN System at global, regional, country and subnational levels.
1.2 Navigating this document
This guide is organized in six parts:

[Page 22]
Introduction
The UN Resilience Guidance at a glance
New Way of Working
El Niño Blueprint for Action
Sustaining Peace Agenda
Common Strategic Approach to Climate Change
SG’s Prevention Agenda
Plan of Action on Disaster
Risk Reduction for Resilience
Many more...
Strengthened Coherence
UN country-level planning processes
Development
National
Subnational
Sectoral
Recovery
Peacebuilding
Humanitarian & Protracted Crises
Contexts
Country development planning
UN country-level planning processes
Humanitarian
Response Plan
UN Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework
Integrated Strategic
Framework
Health Emergency 
Disaster Risk Management 
Framework
Mainstreaming, Acceleration and Policy Support
City Resilience Proﬁling
Capacity for Disaster
Reduction Initiative
Framework for Strengthening
Resilience for Food Security and Nutrition
Community-Based
Resilience Analysis
Guidance on Risk 
Informed
Programming
Gender-Responsive
Resilience-Building
Safe Hospitals Initiative
Post-Disaster
Needs Assessment
Many more...
Jo in ed
-u p t oo ls,
Framework for Strengthening
Resilience for Food Security and Nutrition ap pr oa ch es an d pr og ra m mi ng
Common UN
Guidances
UN Resilience Guidance
UN
Teams resilience lens

[Page 23]
Why resilience matters
Why resilience matters © Sayed Omer Sadaat – UNDP

[Page 24]
Why resilience matters
2.1 Addressing the challenges of a changing world 
Risks associated with natural and human-induced hazards, climate change, violent conﬂict, epidemics and pandemics, ﬁnancial systems and food price ﬂuctuations overlay risk drivers related to poverty, inequality (including gender inequality), discrimination and exclusion, extremism, demographic pressures, unplanned urbanization, ecosystem degradation, displacement, weak institutions and declining respect for human rights. There are also risks associated with the less-visible degradation and loss of water, ocean, forest, soil and biodiversity systems. When risks accumulate and interact, they can manifest as crises and unleash cascading impacts on sectors and across systems, causing loss of life and livelihoods and dramatic socio-economic and environmental damages.16 The COVID-19 pandemic is a stark example, which started as a health emergency with now huge socio-economic knock-on effects that interplay with an unfolding climate and environmental crisis. In addition, the threat of terrorism and the rise of competing powers, alongside an emerging populism and rising nationalism, are challenging the international order needed to manage complex or systemic risks and build long-term resilience.
At the same time, human suffering and the socio-economic and environmental impacts of crises are rising, and humanitarian needs are mounting year-on-year as more people are affected by increasingly protracted crises.17 
At the beginning of 2020, nearly 168 million people were predicted to need humanitarian assistance and protection. This represents 1 in about 45 people in the world and is the highest ﬁgure in decades. In the context of the unprece-dented impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on all countries, the number of people requiring humanitarian assistance is set to increase signiﬁcantly, particularly in countries already facing other crises. Additionally, the duration of displacement is growing, with prolonged refugee situations across the globe now lasting an estimated 26 years on average.18 The scope and scale of armed conﬂict and violence are evolving.19 Over the past decade, internal conﬂicts have con- tributed to the highest number of conﬂict-related fatalities since the end of the Cold War. Their proliferation has also reversed the decline in the number of intra-State conﬂicts between the early 
1990s and the early 2010s.20 In 2016, more countries experienced violent conﬂict than at any time in nearly 30 years. 
Much of this violence remains entrenched in low-income countries, yet some of today’s deadliest conﬂicts are in countries with higher income levels and stronger institutions.21 At the same time, economic and environmental losses due to disasters are rising rapidly, whilst global data on the impacts of events does not take account of many small-scale events that cause cumulative impacts and are a constant reality for many communities. Alone from 2005 to 2015, disasters 
In today’s world, the nature of risks and of their interrelations is changing. Progress towards sustainable development and peaceful societies in which no one is left behind is undermined by multiple and intersecting threats that are intensiﬁed by several persistent risk drivers with cumulative effects.
At the beginning of 2020, nearly 
168 million people were predicted to need humanitarian assistance and protection. 
This represents 
1 in about 45 people in the

[Page 25]
Why resilience matters caused US$1.4 trillion in damage, killed 
0.7 million and affected 1.7 billion people.22 It is estimated that, by 2050, the number of people in urban areas exposed to cyclones will increase from 310 million to 680 million people and the number of people at risk of suffering major earthquakes will increase from 370 million to 
870 million.23
Making progress towards the SDGs in such a volatile context will be contingent on our collective ability to address interconnected risks. 
Resilience is a unifying approach that transcends the humanitarian,24 development, human rights, and peace and security pillars and should guide the design and implementation of integrated and cost-effective approaches to lower multiple risks and prevent crisis. 
2.2 Seizing the multiple dividends of resilience-building
Multiple dividends can be gained from building resilience.25 
First, investing in resilience helps prevent and curtail economic, environmental and human losses in the event of a crisis, thereby reducing human suffering and protecting development gains. 
For example, in Bangladesh, deaths from cyclones have been reduced considerably, due to a combination of strengthened coastal defences, cyclone shelters, gender-responsive approaches, and early warning and early action systems. Investing in well-targeted activities to prevent and mitigate risks is usually more cost-effective than response measures alone. The Global Assessment Report on 
Disaster Risk Reduction (GAR) 2015 concludes that annual global investment of 
US$6 billion in appropriate disaster risk management strategies would generate US$360 billion of total beneﬁts for risk reduction.26 The joint UN-World Bank 
Pathways for Peace report estimates that the net savings from conﬂict prevention could reach almost US$70 billion per year.
Second, building resilience can stimulate risk-sensitive economic activity by creating a conducive environment for public and private sector investments as well as entrepreneurship and livelihood diversiﬁcation by businesses and households.
Increased resilience frees up resources for sustainable development and enables long-term planning and investments. For example, a survey of European companies revealed that investing in resilience can help develop market opportunities, with 43 percent of the companies surveyed anticipating increased demand for existing products and services.27 Despite up-front costs, resilience-building brings considerable dividends.
Alone from 2005 to 2015, disasters caused 
US$1.4 trillion in damage, killed 0.7 million and affected 1.7 billion people.

[Page 26]
Why resilience matters
Third, investments in resilience are beneﬁcial even in the absence of a crisis.
Inclusive, community-based disaster preparedness can support gender equality by increasing women’s involvement in community-level activities, and proactively involving persons with disabilities in community-level disaster preparedness can help increase acceptance and overcome stigma and stereotyping. The construction of an emergency shelter can contribute to community cohesion by providing communal space for social and economic activities. Flood risk management at ecosystem and farm levels, can increase agricultural production or ﬁsh catch in ﬂoodplains in normal times, with economic beneﬁts and improved food security.28 
Investments in resilience can bring co-beneﬁts across many of the Sustainable Development Goals. 
Focusing attention and resources to build resilience where risks intersect can be a more cost-effective and transformative way to progress simultaneously toward multiple development goals. A resilience lens also helps to target the most vulnerable and marginal groups at risk, ensuring that no one is left behind on the path towards sustainable development.
An annual global investment of US$6 billion in appropriate disaster risk management strategies would generate US$360 billion of total beneﬁts for risk reduction.
© Imen Meliane – UNDP

[Page 27]
Why resilience matters
2.3 Relevance in different contexts
Resilience-building interventions, examples of which are below, are relevant for a range of humanitarian, development and conﬂict-affected contexts and crises.
Countries may experience a combination of these contexts in the same or several locations, making an integrated, whole-of society, multi-sectoral and systems approach to resilience-building even more important. 
In countries with great exposure and vulnerability to natural/biological hazards and climate change impacts,29 resilience-building is central to managing uncertainty, saving lives and livelihoods and protecting development gains.30 
Many SIDS, fragile settings, LDCs and 
MICs could fall into this category. Multipronged approaches to building resilience across and within sectors could be pursued in these contexts, such as:
(i) strengthening risk monitoring, early warning and preparedness capacities to ensure that exposed populations are kept out of harm’s way, and to prepare to build back better ahead of disasters; (ii) preventing, protecting against and controlling disease outbreaks, epidemics and pandemics through public health responses;31 (iii) investing in risk transfer and social protection mechanisms to mitigate the socio-economic impacts; (iv) supporting resilient and sustainable livelihoods and ‘climate-smart’ practices, particularly for rural populations who largely depend on agriculture; (v) adopting disaster and climate risk-informed development policies and investments for risk- prooﬁng infrastructure, social services (health, education, etc.) and energy grids; (vi) protecting and rehabilitating ecosystems such as mangroves, wetlands and forests, that act as natural cost-effective buffers, store carbon and provide unique life support services; (vii) strengthening capacities for natural resource management for risk reduction and adaptation; and (viii) supporting risk-informed recovery processes combining all above- mentioned interventions to build back better. 
Additional entry points for strengthening climate resilience can be found in the UN Secretary-General’s Climate Change Strategy (see Annex 2) and the Climate Action Summit Report.32,33 
Conﬂict prevention and peacebuilding interventions may also need to accompany these approaches, since disaster- and climate-change-related risks occur more and more often amidst social tension, violence and conﬂict. 
In countries that are at risk of entering conﬂict, that are in it or that are emerging from it, a resilience approach can help sustain peace by preventing the outbreak, continuation, escalation and recurrence of violent conﬂict and address the root causes and drivers of conﬂict. This means that resilience-building principles can be applied during all stages of conﬂict, especially when honing in on the adaptive capacities that foster social cohesion and help prevent conﬂict.34 The implementation of full-ﬂedged resilience-building programming, however, is often limited in open conﬂicts and unstable emergency situations. A focus on resilience can also help societies prevent conﬂict from becoming violent and can contribute to sustaining peace and sustainable development by: (i) establishing mechanisms to foster dialogue and promoting collaboration among and between communities and different groups to better manage tensions and disputes; (ii) supporting resilient and responsive institutions by developing the capacity of leaders at all levels to lead and govern collaboratively;

[Page 28]
Why resilience matters (iii) promoting access to services such as health, education and food to support the daily functioning of societies; (iv) promoting equitable natural resource management to reduce competition over limited resources and promote sustainable use; (v) building resilient and sustainable livelihoods that can reduce economic grievance and exclusion, particularly among youth; and (vi) ensuring interventions address the interrelation between risks related to conﬂict and other types of risks, including from natural hazards climate change or epidemics. Human rights violations are symptoms and causes of violent conﬂict. Hence, human rights are central to resilience-building before and after conﬂict, e.g., in peace agreements, the treatment of refugees, humanitarian assistance and the creation of truth and reconciliation commissions to hold perpetrators of human rights abuses accountable. 
In countries with protracted and/or recurrent humanitarian crisis, a focus on resilience can bolster the self-reliance of communities exposed to recurring or compounded disasters, such as epidemics or extreme events, and strengthen institutions reliant on short-term interventions to break the cycle of crisis and recovery. 
Many fragile settings and LDCs are in this category. Tools for risk analysis – such as those across the disaster, climate and conﬂict dimensions – can shift the focus from responding to preventing and anticipating risks and crisis. These tools can steer the allocation of resources to build the resilience of those people and sectors most at risk, quicken their recovery and address underlying risk drivers. In these contexts, aligning humanitarian, development and peace- and security-related activities around collective outcomes can provide a potent accelerator for achieving the Sustainable Development Goals and other supporting global policy frameworks by reducing need, vulnerability and risks. 
The cross-border areas of the Horn of Africa have historically suffered from under-investment as well as some of the highest poverty rates in the region, exacerbated by ever-more frequent drought. In this regard, cross-border cooperation has been made imperative in the implementation of IGAD Drought Disaster Resilience and Sustainable 
Initiative (IDDRSI). This has led to the identiﬁcation of eight cross-border clusters, which are geographic areas that share similar biophysical and socio-economic attributes, within national boundaries of two or more countries. In this context, IGAD and its partners have been facilitating cross-border cooperation through (i) supporting risk-monitoring and early warnings, information-sharing and other coordination mechanisms across borders; (ii) facilitating the creation and enactment of relevant cross-border and drought risk-informed cooperation policies, protocols and investments; and (iii) capacity-building of relevant stakeholders (regional, national and community levels) in risk management measures.
Regional example 
Cross-border collaboration in the Horn of Africa

[Page 29]
Why resilience matters
In regional contexts that experience cross-boundary risks, challenges to resilience do not adhere to political and geographic boundaries. Riverine ﬂooding can extend across state boundaries; coastlines impacted by sea level rise can span countries; armed conﬂicts can involve two nations or extend at regional level; hurricanes can negatively impact many countries of the same region, as during the 2017 Atlantic hurricane season; economic shocks can impact entire continents; and epidemics such as the COVID19 pandemic can spread across borders to all parts of the world.35 Also to consider are indigenous peoples, ethnic groups and communities divided by borders that are exposed to cross-boundary risks. Solutions to these challenges require multi-country, regional or global approaches to design and plan for resilience and demand a combination of many of the above-mentioned interventions.
The highly context-speciﬁc nature of resilience implies that it is a dynamic and evolving process, constantly changing over time. Even though there is no linear approach, a sequenced action allows for measures to be adjusted according to the changing context.
Also to consider are indigenous peoples, ethnic groups and communities divided by borders that are exposed to cross-boundary risks. Solutions to these challenges require multi-country, regional or global approaches to design and plan for resilience and demand a combination of many of the above-mentioned interventions.

[Page 30]
What is resilience
What is resilience? © Jason Stewart – UNDP

[Page 31]
What is resilience
This is even more pressing due to the wide range of deﬁnitions in use by different sectors and communities of practice (i.e., peace and security, development, humanitarian, human rights, disaster risk reduction, climate change, environment, health, etc.). For the purpose of this UN 
Guidance document, some key terms are used as follows:36 
Resilience
Resilience is the ability of individuals, households, communities, cities, institutions, systems and societies to prevent, resist, absorb, adapt, respond and recover positively, efﬁciently and effectively when faced with a wide range of risks, while maintaining an acceptable level of functioning without compromising long-term prospects for sustainable development, peace and security, human rights and well-being for all.37 
Risk 
Risk is the consequence of the interaction between a threat or hazard, the characteristics that make people and places exposed and vulnerable to that threat or hazard, and the capacities available to manage the risk.
Thus, risk results from the complex interaction between the potentially negative consequences of development processes that generate conditions of exposure and vulnerability, the characteristics of the threat or hazard, and the systemic capacities available and accessible to manage the risk. For example, unplanned urbanization, poverty and inequality force the poor to settle on marginalized lands that may be exposed to ﬂooding or landslides. 
It is critical to build resilience to both infrequent high-impact events as well as frequent low-impact and local events that may remain invisible at national and global levels, but that gradually erode development gains and coping capacity.38 
Risk drivers
Risk drivers – or risk factors, stressors – are processes or conditions, often related to development and inequality, that inﬂuence the level of risk by contributing to exposure and vulnerability or reducing capacities.39 
Risk drivers can include poverty and inequality, weak risk governance, gender inequality, marginalization and socio-economic exclusion, climate change and variability, unplanned and rapid urbanization, poor land and ocean management, overexploitation of renewable natural resources (i.e., biodiversity, forests, water aquifer, soil) and erosion of fragile ecosystems, as well as compounding factors such as demographic change, and interactions between animals and humans that increase the risks of zoonotic diseases leading to epidemics and pandemics.
3.1 Shared conceptual clarity 
Having a shared conceptual understanding of resilience among UN Teams is fundamental to collaboration in joined-up UN System-wide efforts and interventions.

[Page 32]
What is resilience
Threats or hazards include those related to natural, human-induced and technological hazards, epidemics, economic shocks, conﬂicts, insecurity and human rights violations.40 
These threats can also intersect. For instance, dry spells can aggravate grievances and violent conﬂict, particularly in regions where livelihoods are reliant on agriculture (e.g., in the Horn of Africa and the Sahel subregions). Threats are not always sudden-onset phenomena, such as earthquakes or cyclones. They can also refer to slow-onset occurrences such as drought, saltwater intrusion, or rising social tensions.41 Outbreaks of disease may occur as a result of conﬂicts and natural hazards such as droughts, ﬂooding and earthquakes, which can affect food security, damage infrastructure and access to health services. 
Events are the manifestations of threats and hazards, or a combination thereof, in a particular place during a particular period of time.42 
Shocks are considered external shortterm deviations with substantial negative effects on people’s current state of well-being, level of assets, livelihoods, safety or ability and capacity to withstand future shocks. 
Gender inequality heightens exposure to risk, increases vulnerability and restrains capacity. It shapes women’s and girls’ uneven capacity to anticipate, adapt and recover from crisis and to contribute effectively to resilience-building. Gender-speciﬁc barriers prevent women from acquiring and accessing the means and capacities needed for resilience, which causes women’s higher loss of lives and livelihoods in disasters and crisis and can result in a gendered downward spiral of vulnerability following crisis. Unmet needs such as access to disaster compensation, livelihoods, education, skills training, ﬁnance, reproductive health, gender-based violence and judicial services are amongst the key areas that leave women and girls disproportionally vulnerable to current and future crisis. Attention to gender equality and women’s empowerment in resilience-building will help achieve greater impact on systems-level resilience.
Gender inequality a key risk driver

[Page 33]
What is resilience
Multidimensional risks and context
The multiple dimensions of risk – including the threats, exposure, vulnerabilities, capacities and risk drivers – that have the potential to disrupt society or a given system and its parts at local, subnational, national or regional levels, must be understood and analysed within speciﬁc political, socio-economic and environmental contexts.  Understanding the risk landscape and the systemic nature of risk requires in-depth analysis of how the risks and their underlying factors interconnect and interact at different levels and in a highly dynamic and ﬂuid environment. The ‘how-to’ part of this document provides further details on the suggested steps and considerations for UN 
Teams to reach a shared understanding of the wider risk landscape and country context.
3.2 The key elements of resilience-building
Whether UN Teams are working at local, subnational, national, regional or global level, building resilience for sustainable development, peace and security, human rights and the well-being for all needs to be anchored in four key elements (see ﬁgure 3).43 
The Key Elements of Resilience-building
Multidimansional risk and context
Interconnected systems
Multiple stakeholders
Resilience capacities
Elements of resilience-building

[Page 34]
What is resilience
Multiple stakeholders44 Since resilience-building cuts across multiple risks, sectors and systems, a multi-stakeholder, inclusive and people-centred approach must be pursued. 
This guarantees the active participation of a broad range of individuals, communities, groups and institutions, blending community, public and private sector perspectives. Local and national actors play a particularly important role as they are usually among the ﬁrst and most immediate responders to disasters, crisis and outbreaks of violence. Such a broad range of perspectives on risk and resilience can inform the process and ensure that the needs of the most vulnerable groups are addressed. Individuals and groups at risk refer to children, young people, persons with disabilities, people living with HIV/AIDS, older persons, 
LGBTI persons, indigenous populations and other marginalized groups, such as refugees, migrants or displaced people.45 
The ‘how-to’ parts (4 and 5) of this Guidance offer a more detailed breakdown of the various stakeholders and their relevance for resilience-building. 
Interconnected systems 
With increasing complexity and interaction of human, economic, political and natural systems, risk becomes increasingly systemic.46 
Resilience-building, therefore, requires a systems approach based on the understanding that many adverse events are occurring across global, regional, national, subnational and local scales, with knock-on effects among interconnected social, governance, economic, ecological and physical systems.47 A system can be a unit of society, organization of people, institutions for service delivery, a sector, a unit of ecology, or a physical entity.48 A systems approach is a holistic approach that supports the identiﬁcation of risks and their interlinkages within and across relevant systems in a given geographic areas. For systems to be resilient, the people, institutions, infrastructure and services that make up the system must be equipped with absorptive, adaptive, anticipative, preventative and transformative capacities (see below). Systems should also be able to identify and manage trade-offs between different interests deriving from the governance, socio-economic, ecological and physical subsystems. The ‘how-to’ part of this guidance provides further information on how UN Teams can determine which system(s) and related sectors they will concentrate on, by choosing from a range of social, health, cultural, economic, governance and environmental systems. 
Resilience capacities
Systems, institutions and people are considered resilient when they have at their disposal a set of distinct capacities and resources that are crucial to cope with, withstand or bounce back from adverse events and shocks (see next page for detailed list of resilience capacities). In addition to the resilience capacities, there is also a need for managerial and a range of technical skills.49 
It is important to remember that capacities at different levels, i.e., at individual, household, community, local, city, subnational, institutional, national and systems levels, may interact and inﬂuence each other. Capacities are also inﬂuenced by levels of income and education, social-cultural norms and prevalent gender inequalities. 
The ‘how-to’ part of this Guidance provides further direction to UN Teams on how to assess the level of existing capacities, or gaps thereof, to manage multiple risks across and within systems.

[Page 35]
What is resilience
Resilience capacities50
Absorptive capacity 
The ability to take protective action and ‘bounce back’ after a shock using predetermined responses to preserve and restore essential basic structures and functions. It involves anticipating, planning, coping and recovering from shocks and stresses (Cutter et al., 
2008; Béné et al., 2012; Oxfam, 2017). 
Adaptive capacity 
The ability to make incremental adjustments, modiﬁcations or changes to the characteristics of systems and actions to moderate potential changes, in order to continue functioning without major qualitative changes in function or structural identity (OECD, 2014; IPCC, 
2012; Béné et al., 2012; Oxfam, 2017).
Anticipative capacity 
The ability to take early action in anticipation of a potential threat to reduce its potential negative impacts; including through early warning, early action and forecast-based ﬁnancing (United Nations Climate Resilience Initiative, 2017).
Preventive capacity 
The ability to implement activities and take measures to reduce existing risks and avoid the creation of new risks. While certain risks cannot be eliminated, preventative capacity aims at reducing vulnerability and exposure in such contexts where, as a result, the risk is reduced (adapted from the OIEWG, 2016).
Transformative capacity 
The ability to create a fundamentally new system when ecological, economic or social structures make the existing system untenable (OECD, 2014; Walker et al., 2004). Transformative capacity is required when the change needed goes beyond the system’s anticipatory, absorptive, adaptive and preventative abilities and when there is recognition that ecological, economic or social structures keep people trapped in a vicious circle of poverty, disasters and conﬂict and make the existing system unsustainable (ActionAid, 2016).

[Page 36]
How to build resilience together
How to build resilience together

[Page 37]
How to build resilience together
Leave no one behind and focus on the most vulnerable and at-risk populations.
Resilience-building needs to target and beneﬁt all people and to leave no one behind by reaching out to those most in need and at risk, wherever they are, in a gender-responsive manner that targets their speciﬁc challenges and vulnerabilities. (See: SDGs, WHS, UNDG/IASC, Sendai Framework, Paris Agreement) Ensure equality, nondiscrimination and a human rights-based approach.
Without full respect for human rights, resilience cannot be achieved. Resilience must be built on active, free and meaningful participation form all stakeholders; comply with international and legal human rights norms and standards; be transparent; and promote equality and non-discrimination. The United Nations should stand up for human rights, even in the most difﬁcult circumstances. It should uphold the state’s responsibility to respect, protect and fulﬁl human rights for all individuals under its jurisdiction, including in emergency, disaster, fragility and conﬂict settings, where individuals’ rights have been violated by state and/or non-state actors. (See: European 
Commission)
Be accountable for pursing inclusive partnerships.
No single actor can deliver comprehensive approaches to resilience-building within and across systems. It is crucial that all stakeholders be engaged to discharge their individual responsibility and jointly explore and reconcile a broad range of perspectives so that the resilience of the most vulnerable individuals and systems can be strengthened. (See: 
SDGs, Conﬂict Analysis Practice Note, UN 
Sustainable Development Group Guidance Note on Conﬂict Sensitivity, Sustaining Peace Resolutions, UNDG/IASC, 
UNDG Eastern and Southern Africa, Sendai Framework)
Do No Harm.
Resilience-building is politically, socially, environmentally and culturally sensitive. 
Therefore, development, humanitarian and peace and security actors must minimize the harm that they may inadvertently do by being present and providing assistance. This includes ensuring that assistance does not increase risk, vulnerability and exposure and that building resilience in one community, system or country does not compromise resilience in another. Do no harm also includes not adversely affecting peace and security and not exacerbating conﬂict risks. (See: 
Conﬂict Analysis Practice Note, the UN 
Sustainable Development Group Guidance Note on Conﬂict Sensitivity, Sustaining Peace Resolutions)
4.1 Shared principles for resilience-building
The resilience-building efforts of UN Teams are guided by several common principles that will inform assessment, planning, implementation, coordination, partnering and learning. UN Teams need to be accountable for the consistent application, monitoring and evaluation of these principles.

[Page 38]
How to build resilience together
Engage and commit over the long term in a ﬂexible, yet strategic approach.
Resilience-building requires a multi-year approach that addresses immediate needs and at the same time the root causes of risk, poverty, vulnerability and human suffering. Resilience approaches must be ﬂexible and sustained through well-calibrated and sequenced short-, medium- and long-term actions so that measures can be adjusted as new risks and hazards emerge and their impacts occur. (See: WHS, UNDG/IASC, UNDG Eastern and Southern Africa, Conﬂict Analysis Practice Note, the UNSDG Guidance 
Note on Conﬂict Sensitivity, Sustaining 
Peace Resolutions, SDG, Sendai Framework, Paris Agreement)
Pursue context-speciﬁc and tailor-made approaches.
States and societies are built around complex and unique interdependencies among political and security actors, institutions, the private sector, civil society, communities, individuals, the environment and the economy, among others. Resilience-building will need to start from a broad and contextualized analysis of whole-of-society capacities, vulnerabilities and risks to anticipate how a system will respond when it comes under pressure. (See: WHS, EU, UNDG/IASC, 
R-UNDG)
Act early to prevent.
Emphasis on prevention includes sharing risk analyses and acting before events materialize as well as looking beyond quick-ﬁx solutions to address the root causes of people’s vulnerability and poverty and reducing their risks. Acting early may also prevent one type of emergency or protracted crisis from igniting another. (See: WHS, UNDG Eastern and Southern Africa, EC, Sendai Framework, Paris 
Agreement)
Build on local and national capacities for ownership and leadership.
Resilience is primarily about the capacity and agency of the people, communities, institutions and systems that are at risk. The success and sustainability of resilience-promoting support depends on the degree of ownership and leadership roles that the affected people, local and national governments and institutions, or systems assume. (See: WHS, 
EC, UNDG Eastern and Southern Africa, 
UNDG/IASC, Conﬂict Analysis Practice 
Note, UNSDG Guidance Note on Conﬂict 
Sensitivity, Sustaining Peace Resolutions, 
SDGs, Sendai Framework, IHR, Health 
EDRM Framework, Paris Agreement)

[Page 39]
How to build resilience together
In some countries, the decision has been spurred by a complex situation in a particular geographic area, such as the occurrence of a crisis or disaster, including epidemics; a protracted crisis context; structural fragility or high levels of political instability; or a combination of these. 
Against the backdrop of protracted crisis situations, UN Teams’ realization that traditional humanitarian, development and peace and security activities have not been able to provide lasting solutions, may also have been pivotal. In other countries, the decision in favour of a joined-up approach is the result of a new planning cycle, a major report (e.g., Post-Disaster Needs Assessment Report or similar assessment), the SDG ‘Mainstreaming 
Acceleration and Policy Support’ process, a high-level event in-country or a risk assessment. In some cases, incentives for joined-up programming were provided by donors or growing calls by governments and partners (including IFIs) to deal with the UN as ONE. Similarly, global frameworks such as the Grand Bargain, the Global Compact on Refugees and the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and 
Regular Migration call for strengthened humanitarian-development collaboration in order to reduce need and increase resilience.
In view of the ongoing efforts to strengthen humanitarian-development- peace collaboration around collective outcomes, a joined-up approach for resilience-building also contributes to closer cooperation and coordination across development-, humanitarian- and peace-related processes and initiatives at local, country and regional levels. It supports the collective ambition of humanitarian-, development- and peace-related actions to reduce risk and needs in order to improve better health, livelihoods, socio-economic and environmental outcomes. Adopting a resilience approach supports the new generation of 
UN Teams to implement this new way of working collaboratively, thus strengthening the collective and multisectoral support offered to governments to achieve their national sustainable development priorities more cost-effectively and efﬁciently.
The decision of UN Teams to commit to working together needs to be taken collectively and in consultation with other relevant partners, including the national authorities, donors, IFIs, local organizations, etc. There must be an agreement that joint or coordinated action on resilience-building in speciﬁc geographic areas across multiple sectors and systems, addresses the complex situation in a given country. As the UN reform is rolled out and the Secretary-General’s vision for a coherent approach to prevention is realized, working collectively through common risk analysis and joined-up programming and approaches has become a requirement for all UN Teams to help deliver the SDGs. The subsequent sections of this part offer practical guidance on how to do this. 
4.2 What encourages collective action on resilience-building?
The reasons that UN Teams decide to take a common approach to resilience-building can be diverse. 
There must be an agreement that joint or coordinated action on resilience-building in speciﬁc geographic areas across multiple sectors and systems, addresses the complex situation in a given country.

[Page 40]
How to build resilience together
The process follows the typical stages of assessment, programming, implementing and monitoring, in the order of a typical UN programme management cycle. 
It is, however, important to adopt a ﬂexible and context-sensitive approach to resilience-building that can evolve with the situation. This means that joined-up programming for resilience can be opportunistic and start at the end of the cycle with joint monitoring and evaluation processes or during the annual updates of the Common Country Analysis (CCA) of the UNSDCF. 
Working together to build resilience is an organic, dynamic and iterative process that must be embraced as a positive, learning-by-doing experience that supports trial, error and innovation. The guidance for joined-up UN programming for resilience is presented here in a sequential manner, ideally starting with assessing and planning, then implementing and monitoring and learning, but it can be used ﬂexibly as entry points present themselves for working together along the programme cycle.
4.3 Joined-up UN programming for building resilience
This section unpacks the process by which UN 
Teams can achieve joined-up programming for building resilience. It highlights what speciﬁcally to consider when applying a resilience lens while programming together. 
Working together to build resilience is an organic, dynamic and iterative process that must be embraced as a positive, learning-by-doing experience that supports trial, error and innovation.
© Naratevy Kek – UNDP

[Page 41]
How to build resilience together
Country example 
Joint programming for resilience-building in Zimbabwe
Zimbabwe has experienced several economic, environmental and political crises, many of which will have long-lasting impacts. The concept of resilience has emerged as a plausible framework for humanitarian and development action and governments see it as a longer-term and more cost-effective strategy to reduce humanitarian needs and to enhance sustainable development. Under the leadership of the government, the development and humanitarian communities have developed a programming framework to improve the absorptive, adaptive and transformative capacities that underlie resilience capacity based on a thorough multi-hazard, multisector assessment. In Zimbabwe, programming for resilience-building focuses on the overlap between areas of chronic vulnerability and the occurrence of shocks and stressors. Interventions have been designed in an integrated manner to ensure that multiple partners and sectors work together to address key leverage points and adopt complementary and synergistic strategies.
Well-being Outcomes (food security, nutrition, poverty)
Transformative Capacity • Strengthen governance functions, including formal and customary institutions • Promote representativeness within governance structures • Improve infrastructure systems (roads, communications, market systems) • Support effective social protection mechanism (formal and informal safety nets) • Promote social and economic policies that support resilience • Provide social services • Develop institutional capacity: public management; accountability systems; technical skills in data collection, analysis, monitoring; early warning; risk analysis • Promote peacebuilding and conﬂict resolution mechanisms 
Adaptive Capacity • Promote diverse livelihood strategies that ensure against different types of risk • Promote asset accumulation and diversiﬁcation • Activities that encourage the expansion of aspirations • Improve human capital (health, education, nutrition) • Enable improved access to credit • Support smallholder market linkages • Improve access to technologies • Strengthen diverse social networks • Promote gender empowerment • Support healthy ecosystems (land, water, biodiversity)
Absorpitive Capacity • Strengthen and mantain informal safety nets • Support local peacebuilding, conﬂict mitigation and natural resource management through informal governance structures • Strengthen risk reduction, risk mitigation and risk coping mechanisms (community-based early warning, contingency plans,household savings) • Strengthen capacity for community organization and collective action
Integrated Resilience Programme
Theory of change
Joint Problem Analysis
Involving diverse stakeholders and contextualized at the subnational level
Multi-Setoral Resilience Assessment
Among chronically vulnerable populations exposed to food security shocks

[Page 42]
How to build resilience together
This section explains how UN Teams can agree on a common understanding of the overall context and risk landscape and how it can affect people’s well-being and the broader social, economic and environmental systems.
It guides UN Teams in the application of a resilience lens in several inter-agency assessment and analysis tools, such as the Common Country Analysis, the 
Humanitarian Needs Assessments, Conﬂict Analysis and the Regional Monthly and Quarterly Reviews, among others. 
Having a shared understanding of the multidimensional risks and context speciﬁcities is one of the four key elements of resilience (see Part 3) and a critical step for developing a shared vision of what needs to be done to boost resilience and integrate it into policies, political strategies, programming and actions across sectors and at all levels. The analysis must look at the interlinkages and the potential for cascading impacts across different risks and at how and where risk is being created and account for uncertainty and change; it can do this by exploring how long-term trends or risk determinants52 can change the nature and impact of an event. The COVID-19 pandemic, for example, started with direct effects on public health that triggered or worsened a secondary food crisis, among other crises. It will also be essential to understand the political economy and how it supports or hinders resilience-building across and within sectors or systems.53
There are many relevant methodologies to assess risk and resilience and 
UN Teams should base their analysis on what is already successfully applied in the ﬁeld of development, humanitarian assistance, human rights and peace and security. 
Building on existing tools and methodologies will also reinforce the notion that resilience is a complementary objective to core programming.54 In support of the 
UN Teams’ resilience-building efforts, connections between different types of assessments across sectors must be more systematic to better understand the multidimensional and interlinked nature of risk. For example, by establishing links among the Common Country 
Analysis, the Humanitarian Needs Overview, Post-Disaster Needs Assessments, 
Recovery and Peacebuilding Assessments, and Conﬂict and Development 
Assessments, UN Teams will be able to compare the results and feed these as needed into each other’s assessment processes. In settings with special political missions or peacekeeping operations, the Integrated Strategic Frameworks and 
Strategic Reviews (self-initiated or mandated by the Security Council) can offer entry-points. This should help overcome fragmentation and facilitate a shared understanding of risks and their root causes for joined-up programming. For this, consolidation of existing tools and methodologies into a single assessment methodology is hence neither necessary nor desirable. A sample of available tools for risk and resilience assessment with detailed guidance on how to conduct assessments can be found in Annex 
3. Selecting which mix of tools to apply will depend on the country context, the system at risk and the scale considered.
4.3.1 
Assessment: 
Common understanding of multidimensional risk and context 
The analysis must look at the interlinkages and the potential for cascading impacts across different risks and at how and where risk is being created and account for uncertainty and change.

[Page 43]
How to build resilience together
The common risk and resilience analysis process should be guided by the shared principles for resilience-building (see above) in order to guarantee ownership of the results and their application in planning and implementation. The success of the risk and resilience analysis depends on careful preparation, the rigor of the analysis, access to multisectoral expertise and specialists who are knowledgeable about risks. The level of commitment, ownership and use of the results to inform better policies and programming will be decisive for achieving real change. UN Teams’ common risk and resilience assessment will need to map current scenarios and future trajectories against different time horizons. 
UN Teams may need to shift in and out of emergency assessments while analysing the dynamic and long-term root causes of risk, vulnerability and weak capacities. 
The UN system is well-placed to monitor changes in risk and adapt approaches, plans, programmes and resources to these changes.
Although the analysis stage is an essential requirement of the resilience-building process, its scale and depth can be adapted to the human and ﬁnancial resources available to UN Teams. 
However, some seed funding will likely be necessary. And since an analysis is more likely during or immediately after a crisis, this may provide useful opportunities for accessing the required resources. 
Other key openings could be donor and partner country planning and budgeting cycles, the annual update of the Common 
Country Analysis or the UNSDCF design process, or, at the initial phases of country strategy development cycles, input to individual agency planning processes and/or linked to the humanitarian planning cycle.55 
Following the steps below will help UN Teams navigate some of the challenges in the risk and resilience assessment process.
Step 1
Agreeing on geographic focus and scope of the risk and resilience analysis: 
Risk and resilience are highly context-speciﬁc and determined by the characteristics of a speciﬁc geographic area, hence it is important for UN Teams and partners56 to identify the geographic area in which they intend to focus their common efforts (e.g., province, district, municipality, cross-border areas). Determining the initial geographic focus of the analysis may be based on the emergence of a situation, such as a crisis, climate variability or development challenge, that highlights the need to address resilience-building in a more holistic manner – for example, a population movement or disease spread. 
Hence, the decision will be taken without yet having access to detailed assessment results and can be adjusted later once these become available. In some instances, area-based approaches that consider the whole population living in a speciﬁc geographic area with high levels of need can be adopted, providing multisectoral support and working with multiple stakeholders. An area-based approach to resilience-building may go beyond the conﬁnes of a particular country and take on a cross-border or regional characteristic. 
Spatial analysis methods that use geographic information systems (GIS) can generate analytical maps that allow

[Page 44]
How to build resilience together overlay of data from different sectors for an integrated analysis of hazards, risks, vulnerability, needs, population and systems. At this step, there will also be a decision about the scale of the analysis, i.e., at the local, district, provincial or national level. Correlating geographic location with data disaggregated by age and sex and exclusion should get particular attention.57 Trade-offs that determine the scope of the assessment and decisions to exclude certain aspects need to be explained and appropriate protections and safeguards on the use of data need to be applied.58
Country example 
Maputo resilience-proﬁling
UN-Habitat’s City Resilience Proﬁling Tool (CPRT) provides a framework to collect and analyse critical information on a city, its stakeholders, risks and context, which leads to a resilience diagnosis and deﬁnes concrete and prioritized actions. Channelled through the local government, the CRPT approach is multi-stakeholder and multi-hazard and can be tailored to almost any urban context, large/small, north/south.
Since 2016, the CPRT approach has been used in Maputo by the City Council, its partners (INGOs, service providers, regional governments, etc.) and other major stakeholders to conduct a resilience diagnosis and deﬁne priority actions through data collection and various dialogues and technical workshops. For Maputo, informality has been identiﬁed as a key resilience issue. Integrated into existing plans and programmes, the resilience diagnosis informs the decision-making processes; identiﬁes appropriate actions for mitigation and adaptation and helps ensure that all residents have access to a safe urban environment. It also informs the targets and goals set out in global development frameworks such as the SDGs, Sendai Framework, Paris Agreement and the New Urban 
Agenda in a traceable way. 
The Maputo experience has generated strong interest from other cities looking for a robust, user-friendly and integrated tool to strengthen or launch their resilience agendas. UN-Habitat is proposing collaboration between the city of Maputo and members of the Medellin Collaboration on Urban Resilience as an example of good practice.
Hazards and Challenges
Spatial Dimensions
City Context and History
Local Government and Public Administration
Population and Demographics
Economy and Livelihoods

[Page 45]
How to build resilience together
Step 2
Collecting quantitative and qualitative data: 
It is not always necessary to collect primary data on risk and resilience, which can be a time- and resource-intensive exercise. Once 
UN Teams have determined the geographic focus of their resilience-building efforts, the next step is to collect existing assessment results and evidence-based data sets on the risks, hazards and risk determinants, as well as the vulnerabilities and capacities of the systems and stakeholders in the given location. Possible sources of information include sectoral ministries, the national statistical ofﬁce, national mapping and geospatial agencies, the national disaster risk management authority, local authorities, 
UN entities,59 IFIs as well as academia and civil society. An important source of information that should form part of the assessment process is the partnership and participation of local populations and indigenous peoples. The local and indigenous knowledge provides very speciﬁc details of the physical environment, infrastructure and livelihoods systems. Cultural and social differences can affect the risk perception and actions of population groups and is, therefore, instrumental for framing risks through the lens of their needs, experience and cultures, and for better understanding the hazards and risks associated with exposure.60 
Gaining a common understanding starts with the UN and other actors using the same data.
The type of existing assessments to be collated could include multi-hazard and vulnerability assessments, stakeholder capacity assessments, exposure analysis, risk assessments, conﬂict analysis and tension mapping, political economic analysis, network analysis, etc. Establishing such an inventory may require the support of a dedicated expert(s). 
Depending on the type, quality and availability of information, the data collection process may reveal some glaring gaps or blind spots that would require a dedicated diagnostic of the risks and resilience of the location under consideration. 
Step 3
Analysing risk and resilience: 
The analysis of the data collected must be done in an inclusive and highly participatory, gender-sensitive manner that engages all key stakeholders (see Part 3) to ensure that a full range of perspectives is considered and can inform the analysis. 
Emphasis should be on involving local communities and decision makers to validate and ensure the ownership and use of the assessment results. If the review process shows any gaps limiting the validity of the analysis, the team will need to collect other available data or/and to fund additional assessment to complement the missing information; this will round out a common risk and resilience analysis across or within sectors and systems. Conducting an analysis with incomplete data can lead to initiatives that leave people behind, exacerbate inequality or create new risks. The analysis process will take a detailed look at the key elements of resilience (see Section 3.2): 
Step 3.1 — Assessment of the main hazards that may affect people and systems in the location considered: The convergence of multiple hazards in any location is increasingly becoming the norm, especially in protracted crisis situations. 
Therefore, the risk and resilience analysis will need to identify each relevant hazard and help understand where hazards may coincide and how they reinforce each other with cascading impacts. 
The objective is to achieve a comprehensive multi-hazard and threat analysis with information on the frequency, duration, magnitude and impact of each hazard, looking at historic information and projections into the future.

[Page 46]
How to build resilience together
Step 3.2 — Assessment of the relevant contextual factors and drivers of risk in the location considered: Contextual inﬂuences, risk determinants or structural drivers of risk61 are long-term factors and trends that can aggravate the impact or magnitude of any event on the affected populations or systems. Although the analysis of some of these factors is already integrated in the Common Country Analysis, UN Teams often struggle with comprehensive context analyses. In particular, an understanding of the political economy and underlying power relations that determine who and why some groups are more at risk, vulnerable and exposed to threats than others, as well as an accurate assessment of the cost of hidden contingent liabilities related to disaster risk, often require more attention.
Step 3.3 — Assessment of the key systems at risk in the location considered: 
The key systems for sustainable development, humanitarian assistance, peace and the enjoyment of human rights must be identiﬁed and assessed, as per the country context. The review of data will look at how potential hazards and threats will affect the systems, how they are set up to cope with those threats and what makes them resilient or susceptible to shocks. 
The vulnerabilities and capacities, as well as pressure points and sensitivities inherent in the systems, need to be analysed with respect to their relevance for a given threat. The analysis will also look at how the systems in a particular location intersect – for instance, the interactions among governance, poverty, and ecosystems management.62 A related aspect is to identify the main stakeholders who inﬂuence the system and how they act on different parts of the system in terms of the scale, quality and access of inﬂuence.63 
The ﬁndings will then feed into the planning stage and help identify which capacities need boosting and how root causes of vulnerability and drivers of risk need to be addressed.
Step 3.3 — Assessment of the population groups most at risk of being left behind: This part of the analysis will map the impacts of speciﬁc threats on different population groups in the location under consideration for the UN Team’s resilience-building efforts. Different population groups experience the impacts of events in different ways based on their gender, age, membership in a marginalized or excluded group, access to assets and services, and other socio-cultural factors. At the individual, household and 
Country example 
Tensions mapping in Lebanon
In Lebanon, UNDP leads the UNCT’s ‘tension mapping’ to monitor, anticipate and prevent violence and conﬂict escalation in areas with large inﬂuxes of refugees. The approach and methodology for the tension mapping are highly innovative, building on quantitative, incident and perception base data and new technologies. The tension mapping complements other risk assessment tools, including the annual joint vulnerability assessment led by UNHCR, UNICEF and UNDP for Syrian refugees in 
Lebanon. 
The assessment provides valuable insight into refugees’ living conditions, such as the size of their families, the shelters they live in, their economic vulnerability and their food insecurity. The tension mapping helps to identify and respond to risks of violence in real time, adapting programmes where needed to meet the needs of affected populations.

[Page 47]
How to build resilience together community levels, the assessment of the populations exposed to threats will need to be conducted in a disaggregated manner. It will also include asset mapping and the assessment of resilience capacity (see Part 3).64 Crucial data sources include censuses and surveys, administrative data sources on the population, and qualitative data collection, including key informant interviews and focus groups at the community level in targeted areas. The UNSDG Operational Guidance on Leaving No One Behind places speciﬁc attention on the most vulnerable populations that are left behind or at risk of being left behind. Adding a resilience dimension to the assessment of the multiple reinforcing sources of deprivation and inequality that make people more likely to be left behind can guide the development, humanitarian and peace measures towards targeted outcomes to strengthen the resilience capacities of those furthest behind and help them on a path towards sustainability. 
Step 4
Agreeing on the priority risks:65 
This is an essential step in the assessment process. Here, UN agencies (heads and specialists), government, partners and risk and resilience specialists reach agreement about the priority risks in the given context based on the steps for data collection and analysis, as described above. The discussion should focus on the principles that guide resilience-building in the country; regional and local settings; how the society’s systems are structured; how risks impact different parts of the system; and where the system is resilient and where it is weak. This step also allows a demonstration of the relevance of risk and resilience to the work of all stakeholders and sets the tone for consensus-building, which will be crucial for evidence-based planning. This step can also inform the UN Cooperation Framework’s prioritization exercise, 
Country example 
Gender-differentiated post-disaster needs assessment in Nepal
UN Women’s contribution to the Post-Disaster Needs 
Assessment (PDNA) in the aftermath of the 2015 earthquake in Nepal is a good example of a gender-differentiated assessment of needs and challenges of women and girls recovering from the devastation. The PDNA was led by government with the support of the UN, EU and World Bank. The Gender and Social Inclusion Chapter covered topics such as women’s and girls’ living conditions, disruption in economic activities, loss of income, negative coping strategies (child labour, human trafﬁcking, early marriage, etc.), disruption in policing and justice systems, loss of family protection, gender-based violence and access to safe, hygienic and private toilets, and health care services.
The assessment was instrumental for ensuring the representation of women and vulnerable groups in all recovery programmes and promoted women’s ownership rights, tenure rights, certiﬁcation and registration and access to information on disaster-management services. It also encouraged women’s participation in rehabilitation and reconstruction jobs, such as public works, investment funds and income-generating projects.

[Page 48]
How to build resilience together
Country example 
Targeting health system and population vulnerability in the Yemen crisis
In 2017, government, health cluster partners, key donors and UN agencies agreed to provide sustainable access to affordable and essential primary, secondary and tertiary health care services through the Yemen Minimum 
Service Package. The most effective way to reach a large population is by strengthening health services on a district-by-district basis by re-establishing District Health 
Ofﬁce leadership and planning and retaining health workers, while rapidly restoring services. A vulnerability analysis of every health district using the Health Resource 
Availability Mapping System (HERAMS) addressing social determinants and multisectoral indicators has allowed the application of equity principles to ﬁrst target those districts with the most vulnerable populations. 
With the catalytic support of the WB/WHO/UNICEF/WFP 
Yemen Emergency Health and Nutrition Project, implementation of the package commenced in 2017 and underwent a major scale-up in 2018. It now covers 10 million 
Yemenis who would otherwise have no access to health care. Data from 2018 showed a dramatic increase in outpatient consultations. Amidst extreme stress, the initiative is a central pillar for strengthening the resilience of the population and for formulating the recovery strategy.
the development of multi-year humanitarian response plans, mission transition processes, as well as peace consolidation and peacebuilding priorities, among others, that build resilience to the risks identiﬁed in the multi-dimensional risk assessment and context analysis. 
Step 5
Application of the common/integrated risk and resilience analysis:
The results of the analysis should drive 
UN Teams’ planning processes in a major way (see Section 4.3.2). However, the analysis can also inform: baselines for emergency response; baselines for monitoring and evaluation; investment decisions of UN, government, civil society and the private sector; and the design of speciﬁc resilience-building interventions within and across sectors, such as (real-time) early warning systems, climate-smart agriculture, safe and sustainable health and education facilities, and urban and spatial planning.

[Page 49]
How to build resilience together
This section explains how resilience can be integrated into UN planning processes at country level based on the evidence generated during the assessment stage. 
It provides guidance to UN Teams and their partners on how to jointly identify and agree on the most appropriate and strategic areas of support.
Joined-up planning is made possible through a partnership-based approach that is broad, pragmatic and inclusive. 
It ensures that UN resilience-building efforts complement each other and come together in terms of geographic locations and groups of beneﬁciaries, including through sequencing and layering interventions across different sectors.
Partnerships for joined-up planning are more ﬂexible than partnerships for joint-programming and allow for a large range of ﬂexible funding options from all donors, whether bilateral or multilateral, and from different type of funds, such as humanitarian, development and thematic vertical funds.
Experience has also shown that achieving meaningful progress in resilience-building requires a harmonized and coherent approach in support of governments’ national development priorities. 
This means that the UN’s planning for resilience-building needs to align with and feed into national policies and strategies to achieve the 2030 Agenda, including national, sectoral and local plans. Depending on the country context, UN Teams may wish to pursue resilience-building by mainstreaming a risk and resilience lens into the UN’s mandatory planning processes; it might do this also by pursuing resilience programming in its own right at the national level and/or at decentralized and local levels in order to develop national capacity to apply a resilience approach. 
4.3.2 
Planning: 
Joined-up planning for collective outcomes 
Country example 
Integrated & sequenced approach to building resilience across multiple agencies
The Rome-based UN agencies (RBA) are joining together in several countries, bringing to bear their complementary strengths to build resilience. To achieve greater scale, sustainability and transformational change, the RBAs effectively layer, sequence and integrate their activities to end emergencies, ensure food security of the most vulnerable and strengthen the agricultural economy as an engine for poverty reduction. In Kenya, the approach is tested on collaboration with the Climate Resilient Agricultural Livelihoods Window of the EU-funded Kenya Cereal 
Enhancement Programme. WFP targets food-insecure people to build productive assets through the provision of cash and technical assistance. FAO and IFAD complement this effort by supporting many of the same smallholder farmers with interventions to stabilize degraded landscapes, natural resource regeneration, and agricultural production and income-generating activities. The 
RBA collaboration is facilitated by a national technical working group and by decentralized government structures at regional and county levels.

[Page 50]
How to build resilience together
The existing UN planning tools and processes should form the starting point for UN Teams’ efforts on strengthening resilience (see table below). 
There is no shortage of common guidance on evidence-based planning in the 
UN System that, in some cases, already provides direction on how risk and re- silience can be incorporated into planning.66 For example, the 2016 UN Commitment to Action on the New Way of 
Working to transcend humanitarian and development divides67 called for the UN and its partners to “develop a shared understanding of sustainability, vulnerability and resilience”.68 Moreover, the 2019 
UN Cooperation Framework Guidance highlights ‘sustainability and resilience’ as a core programming principle for integrated and cost-effective approaches that reduce risks and help prevent disasters and crises.69 A related challenge is that the various planning and programming cycles do not always coincide, which hinders joined-up planning. 
Country example 
A risk and resilience lens in Jamaica’s SDG MAPS Process
Jamaica’s susceptibility to a range of natural hazards, high reliance on natural resources and vulnerability of key socio-economic development sectors – like tourism, ﬁsheries and agriculture – to climate change were a key consideration in the analysis that preceded the SDG 
Mainstreaming, Acceleration Policy Support (MAPS) engagement. During the process, a wide range of stakeholders conﬁrmed the need to risk-inform the national and local development agenda in Jamaica to build re- silience and foster a sustainable development trajectory. 
As a result, Jamaica’s MAPS roadmap prioritized several catalytic actions to drive progress across multiple SDG goals and targets simultaneously while also ensuring sustainability and resilience of development dividends, such as:
 • Better access of policymakers and decision makers to information about risk; this will provide the evidence base for mainstreaming risk reduction into development and reducing the growing economic losses and the exposure of key development sectors to natural hazards and climate impacts.
 •
Better understand socio-economic vulnerability through disaggregated data collection, institutionalized risk information systems, and damage and loss accounting databases. •
Build capacities and systems at national and subnational levels to apply risk information in development planning and implementation at all levels while building the capacities of sectoral agencies for hazard and risk assessment.

[Page 51]
How to build resilience together
Table: Sample of common planning tools
Common planning tools
Opportunities to support resilience
UN Sustainable Development 
Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF) and Common Country Analysis (CCA)70 • Common Country Analysis: (i) the multidimensional risk assessment; (ii) assessment of who is being left behind; (iii) economic transformation analysis; and (iv) environmental and climate change analysis • UN Cooperation Framework design phase: (i) collective outcomes; (ii) theory of change; and (iii) prioritization • ‘Sustainability & Resilience’ is a guiding principle
Humanitarian Response Plan (HRP)71 • Risk factors inform response • Local capacity built into response • Participation of people/institutions
Integrated Strategic Framework (ISF)72 • Articulates the UN’s common vision and collective commitment in support of peace consolidation • Clariﬁes relationships to other priorities related to government’s humanitarian, development, political objectives
Disaster Recovery Framework (DRF)73 • Multi-hazard resilient recovery planning • Inﬂuence the IFIs’ risk-informed investment portfolio
A coherent approach to resilience programming across development, human rights, humanitarian and peace requires a shared vision and articulation of collective outcomes by a wide range of partners, including UN and non-UN actors, based on their comparative advantages.74 
In protracted crisis situations in particular, strengthened collaboration can enable, when appropriate, the reduction of multiple risks for the same people and geographical areas affected by crises.75, 76 © Vincent Tremeau – World Bank

[Page 52]
How to build resilience together
The Regional Refugee and Resilience Response Plan (3RP) is the ﬁrst regional response plan of its kind with humanitarian and resilience-building components. The planning process was co-led by UNDP and UNHCR and other 3RP agencies, bringing a resilience lens into crisis response programming. The 3RP is a two-year rolling plan to account for medium- to long-term response to protracted crisis, longer-term programming outputs, and the emergence of multi-year funding for response. 
The document references “stabilization”, as Lebanon has found that “resilience” was a politically sensitive term, but fundamentally shares the same aspects of absorbing, adapting, preventing and transforming when faced with threats. The current plan, 3RP Regional Strategic Overview (2018-2019), has moved signiﬁcantly into improving measurement of resilience impacts and fostering innovation and better resilience approaches in the eighth year of the crisis.
Regional example 
Syria Refugee and Resilience Response Plan (3RP)
Step 1 
Jointly reviewing the common risk and resilience analysis ﬁndings: 
The risk and context assessment (see 
4.3.1) provides the evidence and the foundation for planning and should be jointly reviewed by UN Teams in order to reach consensus among humanitarian, development, human rights and peace stakeholders on the priority risks and ensure that there are no gaps in the assessment. 
This is an important step, since planning that fails to consider risk can be considered as ‘risk-blind’ and will not lead to resilient outcomes. At this stage, it is also important to take stock of ongoing initiatives that contribute to building resilience as well as those that may be detrimental to resilience-building. The involvement of relevant government agencies, donors, partners and CSOs in this process is strongly recommended. 
Step 2 
Identifying a common vision: 
In a next step, UN Teams will agree on a shared problem statement and collective outcomes that are strategic, clear, quantiﬁable and measurable.77 Resilience-building usually requires much longer than the four-year planning horizon of UNSDCF. 
In such cases, visioning tools such as dream maps or future searches may be considered.
The suggested steps below provide guidance to ensure that a strong focus on resilience-building can be maintained throughout the planning process.

[Page 53]
How to build resilience together
Visioning tools
Opportunities to support resilience
UN Vision 203078 • Considers longer-term trends to formulate the UN Cooperation Framework • Results in ‘A UN Vision 2030 Paper’ to accompany the Common Country Analysis and UN 
Cooperation Framework
Future Search79 • A principle-based planning meeting that helps people transform their capability for action very quickly • Brings people from all walks of life into the process – those with authority, resources, expertise, information and need • Through dialogue, participants discover their common ground; only then do they make concrete action plans
Dream Board • “Dream it, create it, become it” • A creative process to bring into an integrated professional planning process • A blueprint of the people, places and things that participants want to come true; a diagram for turning dreams into reality
Table: Visioning tools
Step 3 
Formulating collective outcomes and results chains for building resilience: 
A range of tools can help with identifying and agreeing on joint priorities, such as the Theory of Change (TOC), which is also featured in the UN Cooperation 
Framework Guidance and Companion 
Package.80 UN Teams should ensure that the TOC results chain has a resilience lens and is aligned with the development priorities of the government, and other sectoral plans and strategies at the national or local level.81
When agreeing on the joint or joined-up resilience-building priorities, the TOC also requires UN Teams to make sure that they base the decision on a thorough analysis of the comparative advantage of the UN and the Teams’ respective agencies compared to other assistance providers such as IFIs, bilateral donors, national and local governments and NGOs.
Step 4
Using the quality assurance checklist to ensure planning for integrated resilience-building: 
Building resilience across different UN programming areas will require that UN Teams remain focused on applying the core elements of the UN Resilience Guidance. A handy checklist keeps UN Teams focused on how to ensure joined-up resilience programming and is provided in Annex 4.82

[Page 54]
How to build resilience together
Country example 
The South Sudan Partnership for Recovery and Resilience83
The South Sudan Partnership for Recovery and Resilience (PfRR) includes partners who are willing to align their programmes, projects and interventions with the approach advocated by the Partnership, wherever they are working; to use common monitoring tools and frameworks to the extent possible; and to contribute to and apply the collective learning on what works. The theory of change developed by the partnership is depicted below.
Self Reliance & 
Transition to 
Development
Re-establish 
Access to Basic 
Services
Donor / 
Implementing 
Agency TA $
Projects & 
Programmes
Coordinate
Collaborate 
Converge
Context 
Sensitivity 
Local Action Plans
Local Commitment 
Selection 
Criteria
Restore Productive 
Capacities
Re-build Trust in People & 
Institutions
More & Better Implementation
Nurture Effective Partnerships & Local Ownership
Reduced 
Vulnerability & 
Increased 
Resiliance to 
Shocks
M & E
Resources
Outcomes
Impact
Super Impact
Replication of What 
Works
Lessons Learning & Sharing
Data Gathering & Research
Advocacy

[Page 55]
How to build resilience together
Based on the lessons learned and good practices from the 2011-2016 UN/Joint Resilience Strategy, FAO, UNICEF and WFP are moving towards a more focused and holistic approach to resilience programming through a targeted 
Joint Resilience Action (JRA) in Somalia. Working towards one shared goal aligned with the mandates and expertise of the three agencies, the collective and multisectoral approach of the JRA includes a joint Results Framework, designed to address the needs of vulnerable and at-risk households in Somalia over a ﬁve-year period (20182022). Flexibility is embedded in all programme elements and approaches to allow for changes over this period.
Country Example 
UN joint programming for resilience-building in Somalia
IMPACT: 250,000 households achieve and maintain improved food security and nutrition throughout shocks and stresses
Outcomes
Outputs
Deliverables
Cross-cutting issues: gender, protection/AAP, shock mitigation measures,social protection, nutrition-sensitive approaches
Goal: Increased resilience of Somali households in target areas
Improved consumption of adequate nutritiousfood within vulnerable households
People’s lives and livelihoods protected against recurrent shocks
Maintained and improved livelihoods and income sources to access nutritious food
Improved consuption of diverse and nutritious food (nutrition messaging, better choices)
Communities have disaster risk reduction systems and safety nets in place
Households have the means to produce, sell and afford nutritious foods
Households have improved knowledge, attitudes towards consumption of diverse food
Increased proportion of vulnerable households involved in and using quality essential services and adopting essential family practices to improve family health and well-being
Increased access to quality essential services and well-functioning and managed schools
Improved knowledge, attitude and practices for better health, nutrition, education, child, protection, WASH, food safety
Increased control of women over time to access services and make decisions
Strength capacities of communities, stakeholder and institution for effective resilience-based planning, policy development and learning
Resilience-based policies, strategies and plans effectively developed (national, regional and community levels)
Evidence-based learning with stakeholders developed to catalyse and improve resilience programming
Communities have improved access to quality services
Households receive critical information on essensial family practice
Women an men are empowered for decision-making
Resilience policies, strategies and plans developed and/or implemented
Evidence generated on resilience through learning and research

[Page 56]
How to build resilience together
Assessing, analysing and understanding multiple risks across and within systems are also driving collaborative implementation of programmes, projects and any other type of interventions. Working together on shared analysis and planning processes helps to forge synergies and partnerships between different actors in one location or one sector or several interconnected systems (i.e., food security, water and health). 
Section 5 explains how partnerships for resilience planning and implementing together can generate higher-impact, more efﬁcient use of resources and the mobilization of additional funds for scale. 
Implementing resilience-building measures together does not mean doing all the implementation work together in a formal manner through a Memorandum of Understanding or other subcontracting procedures. Joint implementation to achieve some of the collective outcomes can be done, for example, during joint/ shared consultation processes for targeting beneﬁciaries in some areas or running complementary services (i.e., mobile adult education and health care services; youth micro-credit and entrepreneurship incentives, etc.). 
4.3.3 
Implementing: 
Acting together for building resilience © David A. Frech – U.S. Navy

[Page 57]
How to build resilience together
This section shows how to include effective monitoring of resilience-building efforts in the UN’s planning and implementation processes. 
Resilience should not be measured as a stand-alone goal, but as a means for achieving the SDGs and a country’s national development objectives. Monitoring resilience should therefore be pursued as part of the UN’s wider M&E efforts.84 This requires building common tools and systems to monitor, evaluate and analyse achievements for UN 
Teams’ resilience-building interventions that are fully integrated as a cross-cutting issue into SDG-related monitoring and reporting. Knowing that data collection and monitoring usually demand signiﬁcant human, temporal and ﬁnancial resources, such an approach could yield beneﬁts especially for countries with limited capacities. 
The measurement of resilience is a new and rapidly developing area of research and practice.85 
For UN Teams, this means that off-therack M&E systems for measuring resilience are not available and need to be custom-made. A starting point could be the resilience-related targets and indicators that are shared by the SDGs and the 
Sendai Framework,86 or any other relevant indicator framework that may apply to the context. For example, in refugee crisis situations, indicators should build on the Global Compact on Refugees indicator framework.87 
While resilience-building interventions face many of the same monitoring challenges as any other type of project or programme, UN Teams need to consider some speciﬁc elements when measuring joined-up resilience-building efforts. 
For example, (i) the impact of resilience-building support may not be apparent for decades; (ii) the causal linkages between resilience-building support and the observed change are unlikely to be linear; and (iii) there can be difﬁculties in measuring the impact of an intervention in the absence of a hazard or threat.88 
For a full list of the speciﬁcs in measuring resilience, see Annex 5.
4.3.4 
Monitoring: 
Measuring the impact of resilience-building
The Lebanon Crisis Response Plan (LCRP) covers a wide variety of resilience-building interventions related to disasters, climate change, health and conﬂict and is supported by an array of actors from within the UN, government authorities, donors, civil society and the private sector. In view of such a comprehensive resilience approach, the need for establishing a common measurement and reporting system that can track indicators designed across and within sectors became apparent. Thus, the 
LCRP coordination secretariat includes a dedicated M&E ofﬁcer. The M&E position is shared between UN agencies and has helped advance a theory of change for the LCRP that bridges the humanitarian development divide and identiﬁes effective programmes and pathways to build sustainability into LCRP initiatives. This initiative also responds to donor requests for a stronger evidence base for multi-year funding. 
Country example 
Uniﬁed measurement and reporting system in Lebanon

[Page 58]
How to build resilience together
Whenever possible, UN Teams should factor dedicated technical expertise and additional resources into their budgets to master the following ﬁve steps in the monitoring of resilience-building efforts:
Step 1
Deﬁning indicators
Once UN Teams have agreed on a results chain during the TOC development process (see Section 4.3.2), the next step is to develop an accompanying monitoring framework with indicators. UN Teams can select from three groups of indicators that together will provide a comprehensive measurement of resilience to capture the changes in the well-being of different groups and systems. Depending on the type of intervention, they could be designed to measure either outcomes or outputs.
Step 1.1 — Process indicators: Focus on tracking compliance with established policies, procedures and standards or principles (see Section 4.1) in executing programme activities in the key areas of intervention. Examples are: measuring the level of inclusion in decision-making processes; application of risk information; adherence to human rights; connectedness and integrated programming; ﬂexibility/adaptability to respond to unforeseen crises and unexpected events; legitimacy, including transparency and participation; and equity in distribution of project beneﬁts across groups. 
Step 1.2 — System resilience indicators measuring the resilience of the main components of the system over time, including how the overall well-being of women and men and the system is affected when shocks occur – for example, how political capital is affected by an earthquake or how social capital is affected by new or escalating conﬂict.90
Step 1.3 — Resilience capacity indicators measuring progress of interventions with positive impacts on: (i) strengthening resilience capacities, as well as (ii) negative coping strategies that boost resilience with negative impacts (for example, turning to crime to deal with unemployment, reducing the number of meals eaten a day or taking children out of school).91 If the level of negative resilience actions increases, the UN Team may want to change the targeting and prioritization of its actions to deter certain critical negative behaviours and help those at risk to adopt better strategies to deal with shocks. 
Step 2
Deﬁning the scale
Since resilience operates at multiple scales, UN Teams need to choose indicators at different levels, ranging from household, community, region, nation and system. Interactions at and between multiple levels must be expected. 
Because resilience is multi-scale, dynamic and multidimensional, monitoring needs to move beyond conventional methods and approaches and take a broad view of systems.89

[Page 59]
How to build resilience together
Step 3
Setting the baselines
For assessing changes between the initial and ﬁnal states, UN Teams need to establish baselines that provide information on the initial state of well-being, vulnerability and resilience capacities. These can then be compared with conditions after a threat has manifested itself or at the end of a particular intervention. Hence, it is important to monitor shocks and stressors in order to better understand and attribute what has caused the change (e.g., fewer shocks, rather than the resilience-building interventions, could have had a positive impact on resilience). 
Information from the common risk and resilience analysis (see Section 4.3.1) will provide important inputs for setting baselines.
Step 4 
Deciding on the monitoring frequency 
In view of the highly dynamic nature of systems, context and risks, it is important to regularly keep track of changes in resilience. For example, crisis modiﬁer activation or other early-action, high-frequency monitoring (i.e., a real-time ’light monitoring’) is triggered when selected threats reach a pre-determined threshold according to the prevailing early warning system. 
Depending on the type of indicator chosen, different data collection methods for monitoring resilience are available, including quantitative, qualitative, objective and subjective approaches. 
Each method has its own advantages and disadvantages in terms of level of participation, time and costs. Nevertheless, data collection methods should ensure disaggregation of sex, age and disability-related data. Anchoring the data collection for baseline setting and monitoring in the existing systems of National 
Statistics Ofﬁces or sectoral monitoring systems will not only save costs, but also develop their capacity. 
Annex 6 provides a sample of existing indicator and measurement frameworks and tools on resilience-building.
The National Resilience Council supports municipalities to use Resilience Scorecards for producing and monitoring long-term, multisectoral resilience roadmaps tailored to local realities. The scorecard considers the resilience of health, education and social protection systems, livelihoods, housing and infrastructure as well as ecosystems. 
Local governments are encouraged to develop their own indicators, particularly in locations affected by conﬂict and disasters. Robust stakeholder engagement – across national and local governments, national corporations and small and medium-sized enterprises, the scientiﬁc and academic communities, and civil society organizations and local communities – has been key to this work and has allowed the resilience agenda to create real ownership of the programmes and their results.
Country example 
The Philippines resilience scorecard

[Page 60]
Partnering, coordinating and ﬁnancing for building resilience
Partnering, coordinating and ﬁnancing for building resilience

[Page 61]
Partnering, coordinating and ﬁnancing for building resilience
Learn and Adapt
Develop networks and systems to amplify resilience solutions beyond UN Teams for sustaining risk-informed policies and practices
Assess Risk & Context
Key institutions and stakeholders lead ongoing investigations of problem and risk identiﬁcation, using data and predictive methods
Develop Joined-up 
Solutions
Channel resources to incubate, accelerate and scale effective risk management solutions
Motivate 
Collaboration
Mobilize support to address priority problems, including risk and vulnerabilities, and work across sectors and silos 
This section shows how the members of UN Teams can better collaborate and create partnerships to build resilience. 
The involvement of multiple stakeholders is one of the four key elements of resilience (see Section 3.2) and experience has shown that resilience-building is most effective when multi-agency actions are layered and sequenced across multiple sectors; involve communities and local actors as well as the public and private sectors; and allow for converging efforts of humanitarian, development and peace sectors. Partnering for resilience-building needs to take place along all critical steps of the programming cycle (see Part 4). 
The UN has unparalleled capacity to convene and mobilize and has the greatest impact when it enables others. 
Also, the 2030 Agenda requires new partnerships with a wide variety of stakeholders on the basis of their respective comparative advantages. 
The main role of partnerships in support of joined-up resilience-building efforts is summarized above. The ‘how to’ part already provides guidance to UN Teams on two of the suggested partnership roles, i.e., on jointly assessing risk and resilience and developing joined-up programme solutions. 
The role of partnerships in resilience-building92
Partnerships for 
Resilience-Building
5.1 Partnering for resilience-building

[Page 62]
Partnering, coordinating and ﬁnancing for building resilience
Any advocacy efforts for resilience-building need to be closely aligned with national development plans and priorities and not communicated as a separate goal. Part 2 of this guidance, Why Resilience Matters, provides useful entry points for shaping 
UN Teams’ advocacy and communication strategies and can be speciﬁcally tailored to the country context.
When it comes to motivating collaboration, UN Teams need to have clarity on the stakeholders to involve in resilience-building and their respective roles, i.e.:
Government authorities
Government authorities at central and decentralized levels (provincial, district or municipal levels) are beneﬁciaries and actors of resilience-building. UN Teams are to partner closely with government to foster government entities’ (i) understanding and management of risks; (ii) investments in resilience; (iii) ability to measure progress toward resilience; (iv) ability to build local resilience from the bottom up; and (v) ability to establish a favourable policy and legal framework for resilience from the top down.93
People and communities
People and communities ensure that the needs of individuals and groups at risk are met, including children and young people, people with disabilities, indigenous people, people living with HIV/AIDS, women, LGBTI persons, older persons and other marginalized groups such as refugees and vulnerable host communities, migrants and displaced people. Civil society and grass roots organizations will be important partners in the UN’s efforts to reach those most at risk and to leave no one behind by identifying and prioritizing the ‘furthest behind ﬁrst’.94
Local and traditional leaders
Local and traditional leaders have an essential role in local governance, which extends to resilience-building and managing and resolving conﬂict. By representing community identity, continuity and stability, local and traditional leaders perform important interface functions between communities and formal government at local level. Engaging them from the outset in assessing risk and shaping and implementing resilience-building measures are a key to success as their inﬂuence and leadership roles not only rally together communities, but also ensure their needs are heard by the authorities and partners alike. 
Women, girls and youth
Women, girls and youth are often underestimated partners when it comes to recognizing their leadership roles in community resilience. The participation and leadership of women and youth and their organizations need to be actively sought for effective resilience-building. In the aftermath of crisis, women often tend to the needs of their families and communities and rebuild community livelihoods, infrastructure and other activities that help absorb and cope with some of the immediate effects of crisis. The fact that women are often underrepresented in politics is a clear indication of their absence in the development of national priorities, including those related to resilience. 
Joint advocacy is critical for mobilizing the support of governments to lead on resilience-building and of all other actors to join hands and contribute to the long-term vision for sustainable development.

[Page 63]
Partnering, coordinating and ﬁnancing for building resilience
Regional entities
Regional entities are important partners since risk drivers and threats such as droughts, epidemics, pests or conﬂict are rarely constrained by national boundaries, especially when involving displacement, migration and human mobility. 
Cross-border issues and dynamics frequently require speciﬁc attention and collaboration. Hence, UN Teams should support governments to engage in regional initiatives and partnerships as well as collaborate directly with regional intergovernmental bodies. 
Private sector
The private sector’s commitment to risk reduction and adaptation is of prime importance. Private sector investments dwarf those of the public sector; ensuring that these investments are risk-informed in order to contribute to resilience-building, rather than undermine it, is key. Also, advocating for business continuity models is essential to ensure that shocks do not impact employment and supply chains. 
International ﬁnancial institutions and donors
International ﬁnancial institutions (IFIs) and donors should be part of the joined-up resilience-building efforts at all scales. A shared understanding of risk and vulnerability will help to shape IFIs’ and donors’ risk-driven and people-centred capital investment portfolios.
Academia, research institutes and think tanks
Academia, research institutes and think tanks are important partners for generating evidence and data on resilience-building in support of assessments, policy-setting and programming, including venturing into innovative areas. 
Multi-actor initiatives, partnerships and alliances
Partnering with global, regional and national  multi-actor initiatives, partnerships and alliances  working on resilience should also be considered since they can provide access to technical assistance, relevant tools and funding. Many of these initiatives have been mushrooming over recent years to ﬁll a ‘resilience gap’ and a comprehensive stock take is yet to be compiled.
How the private sector invests, develops supply chains and builds capital assets and infrastructure can determine if its activities reduce or create risk and resilience within the communities and economics in which it operates. 
UNDRR’s ARISE Private Sector Network is an example of how the UN can work with the private sector to establish norms and business practices that support resilience and sustainable development. Through its national chapters, 
ARISE aims to support resilient societies by integrating disaster risk reduction into business management strategies and investment decisions. ARISE aims at unleashing the potential of the private sector’s know-how, innovation and convening power in partnership with governments and stakeholders to deliver measurable changes in business practices towards resilience. ARISE Philippines, a network of over 70 national companies as well as small and medium-sized enterprises, is particularly active. The network conducts disaster response and recovery initiatives and workshops on building the resilience capacity of local enterprises; national workshops for developing business continuity plans; and an annual national leaders’ forum that brings national government ofﬁcials, private sector executives and local government representatives together to share knowledge and good practices on risk reduction and resilience in the private sector. The ownership and engagement of the national private sector, with guidance given by the UN, have been crucial to the ongoing success of ARISE Philippines.
Global example 
The ARISE Private Sector Network

[Page 64]
Partnering, coordinating and ﬁnancing for building resilience
UN Teams and their partners need to approach resilience programming with a willingness to learn and innovate. 
Learning and sharing in action
The complexity and dynamism of resilience-building require moving beyond ‘business as usual’ and therefore cannot solely rely on good or best practice solutions. Learning and adapting are an iterative process that should take place throughout the programming cycle and be resourced and planned within resilience projects and programmes from their onset (see also Part 4 on monitoring).
They will greatly facilitate ﬂexible and forward-looking decision-making and help ﬁnd ways to adjust basic assumptions and processes.95 Importantly, however, learning and adapting are an excellent way to share experiences among a broad set of stakeholders. Understanding each other’s perspectives, sharing experiences among actors and learning from these exchanges should be a cornerstone of resilience-building. 
Learning and 
Adapting
Flexible & forward-looking decision-making
Data, information and evidence
Multiple stakeholders
Knowledge products & events
Resilience programme or strategic framework
Adaptative measures, new collective solutions, reﬂection on trends, impacts of action (intended & unintended) successes and failures
M&E, research, reports, newspapers
UN, government, donors, 
NGOs, private sector, communities, academia, think tanks
Materials, audio, video, scientiﬁc analysis, trainings, knowledge products

[Page 65]
Partnering, coordinating and ﬁnancing for building resilience
Country example 
The South Sudan Partnership for Recovery and Resilience
In South Sudan, resilience-building has emerged as a multi-actor and cross-sectoral collaborative approach that brings together humanitarian, peace and development efforts, reduces dependency on humanitarian assistance, and increases community self-reliance. Experience within the country has shown that coordination across a range of sectors is essential for the realization of greater collective impacts for resilience. A minimum level of stability is considered a pre-requisite to the inclusive, community-driven approach to building resilience that has been developed through the South Sudan Partnership for 
Recovery and Resilience (PfRR). 
Seven ‘areas of stability’ were identiﬁed by the PfRR in 2019; in addition to stability, the willingness of local leaders to promote and support a locally-owned, community-driven process is also a key requirement for 
PfRR engagement, which is based on the “four-C’s” principles: coordination, collaboration, co-location, and commitment. Interventions are organized around four pillars: (i) Re-establish access to basic services; (ii) Restore productive capacities; (iii) Rebuild trust in people and institutions; and (iv) Nurture and broaden effective partnerships. The area-based approach allows context-speciﬁc interventions that can be implemented in a ﬂexible manner in response to changing priorities within the overall unpredictability of the natural, socio-economic and political environment at the local level. In practice, this has led to a very organic, iterative way of working together that is built on continuous learning and re-orientation of both the interventions and the structures and processes that guide the partnership in each of the geographic areas.

[Page 66]
Partnering, coordinating and ﬁnancing for building resilience
5.2 Coordinating for greater impact
By convening across groups of stakeholders, UN Teams should facilitate and support rather than own the resilience-building process. The extent of this facilitation may vary from one country to another, depending on the capacities of the government and the capacities of the UN 
System or the level of stability or fragility of crisis or post-disaster situation. 
For achieving collective impacts in resilience-building, a suitable coordination mechanism(s) may need to be identiﬁed that can ensure effectiveness, coherence and complementarity of the interventions by multiple stakeholders.
Coordination for resilience-building is best integrated into already-existing coordination forums, platforms or clusters in order to avoid redundancy of mechanisms and to save time and resources. The national planning, public investment, SDG or aid coordination platforms/committees could be considered. Multisectoral and multi-stakeholder groups that offer a composite outlook on risk and resilience may be particularly useful in support of a comprehensive approach. Government leadership for coordination at the highest-level has proven to provide a good impetus for cross-sectoral collaboration. At the same time, resilience-building efforts also need to be well integrated into existing sector-speciﬁc coordination mechanisms, such as those for disaster risk reduction, climate adaptation, agriculture, health, education, water and sanitation, forestry, energy, tourism, etc. Existing sector and cross-sectoral planning and programming mechanisms can be built upon where feasible, such as National Adaptation Plans (NAPs), Nationally Determined 
A multi-stakeholder effort always requires a certain level of formal coordination, which is also the case for building resilience. Whenever possible, coordination for resilience-building should be placed under the leadership or co-leadership of the government authority. 
Country example 
Implementing the Comprehensive Refugee Response Framework (CRRF) in Uganda98
Uganda currently hosts over 1.4 million refugees, the majority of whom – 73 percent – are from South Sudan. The 
Uganda Comprehensive Refugee Response Framework (CRRF) is coordinated by a government-led multi-stakeholder CRRF Steering Group that brings together humanitarian and development communities, local governments and authorities, refugees and the private sector to engage and guide on refugee affairs. It addresses ﬁve mutually reinforcing areas: admission and rights; emergency response and ongoing needs; resilience and self-reliance of refugees; expansion of third-country solutions and complementary pathways (such as scholarships and student visas); and voluntary repatriation, which, in the current situation, focuses on investing in human capital and transferrable skills as well as support to the countries of origin. The CRRF is thus an excellent example of multi-stakeholder engagement across a spectrum of short-, medium- and long-term resilience-building interventions with a strong human rights angle.

[Page 67]
Partnering, coordinating and ﬁnancing for building resilience
Contributions (NDCs), National Disaster Risk Reduction Strategies, National 
Water Strategies, etc.
Since resilience-building needs to occur across scales, regional, subnational, local and urban coordination mechanisms also need to be identiﬁed and strengthened as needed. 
Cross-border areas that are facing common risks are also increasingly regarded as areas for collective resilience-building. UN Teams should foster exchange and coordination among actors from different countries of the same cross-border area and ensure constant communication with regional intergovernmental bodies and/or subregional UN ofﬁces. 
Regional Collaboration Platforms and 
Issue Based Coalitions can bolster UN 
System support to building resilience at the regional level and help ensure synergies among regional, transboundary and national resilience-building efforts. 
In addition to supporting the overall multi-stakeholder effort, UN Teams also need to build on and strengthen, as needed, existing coordination mechanisms among their members to ensure that UN resilience-building is complementary and comes together in terms of geographic locations and groups of beneﬁciaries, including through sequencing and layering of interventions across different sectors (see also Section 4.3.2). 
The leadership and empowerment of the UN Resident Coordinator function as part of the UN development system reform, with the support of the Resident 
Coordinator’s Ofﬁces and Multi-Country Ofﬁces, are essential enablers for an approach to resilience-building that involves the entire UN. The entry points for coordinating resilience-building interventions between UN entities at country level include:
 •
The UN Country Team, which encompasses all the entities of the UN System that carry out operational activities for development, emergency, recovery and transition in programme countries, supported by UN Resident 
Coordinator Ofﬁces and their human resource capacities to support a resilience approach.96 •
The Humanitarian Country Team (HCT), which includes representatives from the UN, International Organization for Migration, international 
NGOs, the Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement and is responsible for agreeing on common strategic issues related to humanitarian action.
 •
The Humanitarian Cluster System, which brings together humanitarian organizations, both UN and non-UN. 
Clusters are established for the main sectors of humanitarian action, e.g., water, health and logistics.
 •
The UN Senior Management Team, which operates in mission settings where a Special Political or Peacekeeping mission is deployed and brings together the different UN entities under the leadership of a designated Special Representative of the 
UN Secretary-General.
Cross-border areas that are facing common risks are also increasingly regarded as areas for collective resiliencebuilding. UN Teams should foster exchange and coordination among actors from different countries of the same crossborder area and ensure constant communication.

[Page 68]
Partnering, coordinating and ﬁnancing for building resilience
Regional example 
Horn of Africa resilience investment tracker
Following the adoption of the IGAD Drought Disaster 
Resilience Sustainability Initiative (IDDRSI) in 2012, the 
IGAD has developed, with the support of OCHA, a resilience investment tracking system that gives decision makers and other managers a way to plan, monitor and coordinate resilience-building efforts in the region. Based on a who-is-doing-what-and-where (3W) mapping within the different IDDRSI’s Priority Intervention Areas, the system gives information about resilience activities, their location, their budget and the actors involved. This information can then (i) identify project gaps and marginalized areas, avoid duplication and prioritize investments; (ii) foster collaboration, partnerships and knowledge-sharing; (iii) assist programming and policy development; and (iv) support cross-border synergies and coordination. An easy-to-use portal provides useful information for their programming.
In many country contexts, several of the above coordination mechanisms can coexist. For building resilience, it will be crucial to link them up effectively so that humanitarian, peace and security, and human rights coordination functions are well connected to the development coordination system. 
In humanitarian and mission contexts, entry points within national sector and cross-sector coordination mechanism might also facilitate the transition of the coordination function to national/local authorities and provide an exit strategy from UN-led mechanisms.
For coordination to be effective, there need to be tools to facilitate prompt access to information about the basic elements of resilience, such as information on risk and resilience, resilient systems, the stakeholders at risk, and existing resilience capacities or gaps thereof (see Part 3 on the elements of resilience). 
The information should be captured in a standardized information system that records information about the programmes and projects that focus on humanitarian, development and peace actions, depending on the context. The development and maintenance of a database with information on ‘who does what, where and when?’ (4W mapping) are also extremely valuable for coordination.97 The database is now used as a standard tool in humanitarian settings and could be expanded to include development and recovery programmes. The new UN Regional Knowledge Hubs and the SDG Gateway on data can also be used to gather data on risk and resilience across systems in an accessible and standardized format.

[Page 69]
Partnering, coordinating and ﬁnancing for building resilience
5.3 Financing for resilience
With public, private and philanthropic funding, there is US$106 trillion of institutional capital available worldwide. Yet only a small portion is invested in risk-informed interventions for resilience-building. 
Also, the UN and its resource partners play an indispensable role in ﬁnancing resilience. Its US$26 billion funding for operational activities can, if risk-informed, help secure the US$2.5 trillion needed annually to meet the SDGs by 2030.99 
However, a major obstacle for accessing ﬁnances for resilience is the fragmented international funding architecture, which lies beyond the inﬂuence of 
UN Teams. 
For effective resilience-building, 
UN 
Teams must have access to funds related to humanitarian, development and peace that have much greater ﬂexibility to pursue synergies between them,100 including access to climate ﬁnance and vertical funds.101 Linking different ﬁnancing streams ensures that an appropriate mix of short-, medium- and long-term interventions (response, recovery, development, etc.) can be implemented, based on a more comprehensive understanding of the risk landscape, with a broader range of technical expertise and operational capacity. 
UN Teams can also support countries in developing ﬁnancing strategies that are evidence-based, demonstrate the cost-beneﬁt of investing in resilience and include the right balance of ﬁnancing instruments for risk reduction and prevention, risk management as well as resilient recovery. 
There are, however, several other obstacles to investing in resilience, which UN Teams can help overcome, namely: 
UN Teams can foster greater understanding of the costs and beneﬁts of resilience-building and stimulate investments in risk reduction and prevention by risk-pricing the additional investment needed to ensure that humanitarian, development and peace efforts are risk-informed. This also extends to supporting governments embed resilience within their own national and subnational budgeting processes and strategies, not as separate and stand-alone budget heads but ideally mainstreamed into sectors and appropriately monitored through public expenditure reviews. Resilience investments will almost always be cost-effective and save money. There is a vast literature of cost-beneﬁt analysis for resilience, and the beneﬁts of avoided and reduced losses are typically four to ﬁve times greater that the costs.102
UN Teams can inﬂuence the policy environment and help governments build their capacities to develop and manage high-quality projects that can unlock public and private sector ﬁnancing and ensure that investments are risk-informed (through risk assessments, risk reduction and disaster preparedness activities including early warning and early action). 
While public ﬁnancing is key, and especially important for very poor countries, resilience is also an issue for private ﬁnancing, which comprises 70 to 85 percent of all 
The UN and its resource partners play an indispensable role in ﬁnancing resilience. Its US$26 billion funding for operational activities can, if risk-informed, help secure the US$2.5 trillion needed annually to meet the SDGs by 2030.

[Page 70]
Partnering, coordinating and ﬁnancing for building resilience global investment.103 There are many good examples of public-private partnerships at global, regional or national level and of mobilizing large funds in climate risk insurance across sectors (see InsuResilience example). 
UN Teams can assist governments to invest in innovative ways of providing vulnerable communities with immediate access to ﬁnancial resources in anticipation of and during a crisis. The provision of support, including cash transfers, to build productive assets can enhance the resilience of communities to withstand sudden events and can break down barriers between humanitarian and development interventions, as asset-building becomes a long-term investment. The UN is delivering this support in cost-effective ways through mobile phone and Internet technology, particularly in hard-to-reach areas. 
UN Teams can advocate with donors on the importance of funding resilience-building across humanitarian-, development- and peace-sustaining-related activities. 
In addition to the main bilateral and multilateral donors who are likely to have developed an approach on resilience-building, other non-traditional donors and stakeholders may not be well aware of the shared approach to resilience. UN Teams should therefore speciﬁcally target them.
UN Teams should work with IFIs to engage in development ﬁnancing that is risk-informed, thus making their funds more effective when ﬁnancing development in high-risk areas. In partnership with national and regional development banks and IFIs, 
UN Teams can also explore more opportunities for risk ﬁnancing and insurance to minimize the ﬁscal impacts of shocks without compromising development, ﬁscal stability and well-being. Insurance must provide incentives to promote the reduction of 
The InsuResilience Investment Fund (IIF) is a public-private partnership created by the German Development 
Bank (KfW) on behalf of the German Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development (BMZ). It provides private debt and private equity investments to support the Fund’s overall objective to contribute to the adaptation to climate change by improving access to and the use of insurance in developing countries. The speciﬁc objective of the Fund is to reduce the vulnerability of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSME) as well as low-income households to extreme weather events. The 
Fund also provides technical assistance, e.g., for product design and development and – temporarily and to a very limited extent only – subsidies to reduce the premium payments for end-clients. Target countries of the 
Fund are ODA recipient countries, provided that they have an appropriate investment environment. The target groups of the IIF are existing or new insurance or reinsurance companies that already provide or introduce insurance solutions that help clients mitigate climate-related risks (e.g., insurance schemes for the clients of microﬁnance institutions, insurance schemes for agricultural companies, insurance schemes for countries or regions). 
For example, in Peru, the IIF supported the Seguro Agrario 
Catastróﬁco to protect smallholder farmers with less than 
5 hectares of land and limited assets to cope with the impact of severe weather events. A loss occurs if the average return of the insured crop falls below 40 percent of the recorded historical yield (kilogram per planted hectare). On average, a premium of US$18 is enough to cover an average insured sum of US$165 per hectare.
Global example 
The InsuResilience Investment Fund (IIF) – A Private-Public Partnership104

[Page 71]
Partnering, coordinating and ﬁnancing for building resilience risk, build back better after a disaster and support a transition to development. Insurance for climate risks and disasters is most effective when embedded in a country’s comprehensive risk management strategy and budget and must be accompanied by development ﬁnancing that reduces risk. 
Index insurance, in particular, is becoming more common in developing countries in response to risks of ﬂood, drought, earthquake and rainfall variability. Index or parametric-based insurance can have lower transaction costs and quicker payments than other types of insurance because pay-outs are based not on individual loss assessments, but on a trigger signal that is provided by a predeﬁned risk above a predeﬁned threshold.106 This makes index insurance particularly suitable for contexts where technical capacity is limited. 
UN Teams can support countries mobilize and align all ﬁnancing ﬂows with national sustainable development priorities, in a risk-informed manner, through Integrated 
National Financing Frameworks (INFFs) as per the Addis Ababa Action Agenda. These frameworks provide a structure and prompt for governments to assess their ﬁnancing frameworks as a whole, and guide thinking about reforms that strengthen the implementation of a strategic, holistic and results-driven approach to ﬁnancing their development objectives (see Figure 1.2), thus opening opportunities for ﬁnancing resilience.107 
UN Teams can come together and partner with other stakeholders to access pooled funds in support of comprehensive resilience-building efforts. The UN Secretary-General has called on UN agencies 
The Ethiopia Productive Safety Net Programme (PSNP) began in 2005 to support food-insecure households, to enable them to overcome vulnerabilities without eroding their assets, and eventually to support households to build assets. In 2015, it supported more than seven million people. This expanded to over 10 million people during the El Niño-induced drought in 2016. The PSNP is mainly implemented by the government, with assistance from development partners. The PSNP is also improving community infrastructure and contributing to environmental transformation through sustainable land management and soil and water conservation measures. At the household level, families have better food security, more creation and protection of assets, greater use of education and health services and higher agricultural productivity.
The SDG Fund was highlighted in the General Assembly resolution on UN reform, which invited Member States to “contribute on a voluntary basis to the capitalization of the United 
Nations Joint Fund for the 2030 Agenda at US$290 million per annum.” The SDG Fund is designed to provide catalytic support to UNCTs by allocating resources for national initiatives to unblock policy obstacles that, in turn, unlock SDG partnerships and ﬁnancing, including through integrated, coherent and risk-informed policies across the SDGs. The 
SDG Fund is open to all UNCTs (two or more acting jointly). 
Global example 
The SDG Fund108
Country example 
Government leadership in ﬁnancing resilience105

[Page 72]
Partnering, coordinating and ﬁnancing for building resilience
Forecast-based ﬁnancing (FbF) is a system being implemented across the humanitarian sector to enable quick release of funding for pre-agreed actions, before a forecasted disaster. The World Food Programme is implementing FbF in nine countries prone to recurrent climate-related emergencies. It is collaborating with national and local government partners to determine early warning indicators, thresholds and standard operating procedures so that early actions can be implemented at government and community levels. The World Food Programme is also working with national meteorology/hydrology services and Columbia University’s International Research 
Institute for Climate and Society to strengthen in-country weather forecasting capacities and to integrate their early warning systems into national preparedness plans.
The Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement has established a Forecast-based Action Fund and is currently implementing FbF programmes in more than 20 countries in collaboration with government stakeholders and researchers. The START Network of NGOs has also established an Anticipation Fund, and the FAO has mobilized funds for forecast-based action plans several times in recent years.
Global example 
Forecast-based ﬁnancing 
Threshold, triggers, 
SOPs and early actions in place
Climate-related hazards forecasted
Early action funded and implemented
Disaster strikes (reduced impact)
Humanitarian funds made available early and used more efﬁcently
HELP!
to allocate at least 15 percent of noncore resources to joint activities at country level to draw on and complement what are expected to be greater resources from inter-agency-pooled funds.109 At the global level, a large part of this increase is expected to be reﬂected in two inter-agency funds, i.e., the SDG Fund (see box) and the Peacebuilding Fund.110 The Green Climate Fund (GCF) offers an additional opportunity for funding resilience-building efforts against multiple climate risks. To take advantage of expanded pooled funding, UNCTs need to be pro-active, innovative, partner-oriented and willing to coordinate across collective humanitarian, development and peace outcomes.
UN Teams can engage with IFIs and other donors to embrace ﬂexible funding mechanisms across the humanitarian-development-peace continuum, for example through (i) ‘crisis modiﬁers’, allowing agencies to redeploy development programme funds to respond quickly to an anticipated or current crisis while continuing to invest in activities that address the root causes of people’s vulnerability (this is pre-approved funding made available for a predictable contingency); and (ii) multiyear humanitarian/emergency funds, which enable more effective programming capable of adapting to changing context, better planning of activities, and enhanced coherence with development and recovery programmes.111
UN Teams can support forecast-based ﬁnancing in support of early action, preparedness and pre-planned community and other action before an emergency occurs. These early actions are triggered by immediate funding, minimize losses and damage caused by disaster and climate events and reduce the need for humanitarian assistance in their aftermath. These activities are closely aligned with national strategies and priorities, leverage local ﬁeld expertise and build on existing coordination mechanisms.

[Page 74]
The way forward
Whilst the Guidance is primarily directed at UN Teams and their partners, it is critical that accountability for its applications permeate how the UN System supports risk-informed humanitarian, development, peace and security interventions. 
To that end, this Guidance is approved by the UN Sustainable Development Group. 
In addition, it is also tabled at the UN Executive Committee, the High-level Joint 
Steering Committee to Advance Humanitarian and Development Collaboration and similar senior UN forums to ensure awareness and buy-in across the three pillars of the UN.112 Mainstreaming a shared resilience approach is also a requirement for the UN reform processes, including the new UN Cooperation Framework and its companion package where it serves as a reference on resilience, the Sustaining 
Peace Agenda,113 the New Way of Working, the SDG MAPS process and related policies. 
Throughout consultations for the preparation of this Guidance, many actors emphasized that this document should not be an end in itself, but rather the beginning of an iterative inter-agency process that will drive a more coherent and coordinated UN effort on resilience-building, with the prime objective of equipping governments to lead and achieve risk-informed interventions and solutions. This process is to be ﬁelddriven and focused on improving the utility and applicability of this guidance. The 
Guidance will continue to be shared for review with ﬁeld ofﬁces engaged in relevant resilience-building work. Therefore, it should be considered a living document that may need adjustment over the coming months and years to beneﬁt from innovation and new solutions to resilience-building. To support this, an interagency UN Resilience Reference Group, including current members of the drafting team and core group, can update, adjust and enrich the proposed UN System-wide resilience approach. 
An important element for raising the awareness of UN Teams and partners about the new UN common approach to resilience-building is linked to the development and implementation of a multifaceted communication and advocacy strategy. 
The Guidance will be promoted at relevant global and regional events in the coming months and years and especially in the post-COVID-19 pandemic recovery process to reinforce the urgency to address systemic risks with cascading effects among health, climate, food and socio-economic crises across the globe. 
Also, webinars will be organized on the 
UN Guidance on Resilience and the experiences of UN Teams that have used it. 
Ultimately, the appropriate actors working across the three pillars of the UN at the country level should know and use the 
Guidance. A dedicated resilience-building training will be developed – for example, as part of SDG training organized by the 
UN Staff College and its Knowledge Centre for Sustainable Development. 
Because learning is such an important aspect of the dynamics of resilience-building, it is crucial to encourage innovation and to collect, share and evaluate successful resilience policies and practices from different country contexts. 
Users of the Guidance are encouraged to innovate, develop new thinking and approaches and share their experiences within and across sectors or systems. This will help to establish a community of practice on resilience. It would also help the UN System to facilitate research, learn and adapt to advise and support resilience actions at scale and in most-vulnerable locations for sustainable development impact, peace and prosperity for all. 
This section presents some of the key next steps to ensure that the UN Resilience Guidance is applied across the UN System at the global, regional and country levels.

[Page 75]
The way forward
Innovation has emerged as a key tool for resilience, equality and sustainable growth in the post-COVID-19 context. 
Investing in future-proof jobs and technology to help the world transition to renewable energy to lower emissions promotes a green recovery.
The UN at the highest level will continue to advocate with the international donor community to increase the ﬂexibility of its funding instruments for greater coherence and synergies among its humanitarian-, development- and peace-sustaining-related activities to build resilience in countries that are most at risk. 
There is also a need to reach out to public and private sectors to explore innovative funding instruments for risk-andresilience-driven programmes that UN 
Teams can support to meet the needs of the most vulnerable and/or affected people, ensuring that no one is left behind.
Users of the Guidance are encouraged to innovate, develop new thinking and approaches and share their experiences within and across sectors or systems. 
This will help to establish a community of practice on resilience. It would also help the UN System to facilitate research, learn and adapt to advise and support resilience actions at scale and in most-vulnerable locations for sustainable development impact, peace and prosperity for all. © Soares – UNICEF

[Page 76]
Bibliography
Aall, Crocker (2019). Building Resilience and Social Cohesion in 
Conﬂict. https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/17585899.12681 
Action Aid (2016): Resilience Handbook – A Guide to Integrated actionaid/2016_reslience_handbook.pdf 
AGIR (2013). Global Alliance for Resilience – Sahel and West cations/AGIR%20roadmap_EN_FINAL.pdf
Béné et al. (2017). Squaring the Circle: Reconciling the Need for Rigor with the Reality on the Ground in Resilience Impact pii/S0305750X17301286
Brooks et al. (2014). Assessing the impact of ICF programmes on household and community resilience to climate variability and climate change. https://assets.publishing.service.gov.
uk/media/57a089b840f0b64974000222/EoD_Consultancy_
June2014_Measuring_Resilience.pdf 
CADRI (2010). Basics of Capacity Development for Disaster Risk cadribrochureweb2_0.pdf
Carbon Disclosure Project (CDP) (2015). Carbon Action Report bon-action-report-2015 
CARE Nederland, Groupe URD and Wageningen University (2012). Reaching Resilience – Handbook Resilience 2.0 for Aid net/publications/view/33442
Cutter et al. (2008). A place-based model for understanding encedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0959378008000666
DFID and UNDP (2016). ZRBF Crises Modiﬁer Mechanism (CMM).
ECOSOC Commission on the Status of Women (2012). Report on the ﬁfty-sixth session (14 March 2011, 27 February-9 March and 15 March 2012). http://undocs.org/E/2012/27
ECOSOC Commission on the Status of Women (2013). Gender equality and the empowerment of women in natural disasters. http://undocs.org/E/CN.6/2014/13
European Commission (2017). A Strategic Approach to Resilience in the EU’s External Action – Joint Communication to the 
European Parliament and the Council. https://eeas.europa.eu/ sites/eeas/ﬁles/join_2017_21_f1_communication_from_commission_to_inst_en_v7_p1_916039.pdf
European Union, United Nations, World Bank (2020). COVID-19 
Recovery Needs Assessment (CRNA) Methodology - Summary.
FAO (2017). Strategic Work of FAO to Increase the Resilience of es-detail/en/c/895736/ 
FAO, WFO and UNICEF (2012). A Joint Resilience Strategy for docs/A joint resilience strategy for Somalia_UNICEF, FAO, WFP.
pdf 
FSIN (2015). Measuring Shocks and Stressors as Part of Resilience Measurement. Food Security Information Network (FSIN). upload/fsin/docs/resources/1_FSIN_TechnicalSeries_5.pdf 
Global Compact for Migration (2018). Global Compact for 
Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration. https://refugeesmigrants.
un.org/sites/default/ﬁles/180713_agreed_outcome_global_ compact_for_migration.pdf 
Global Earthquake Model (2017). Resilience Performance ﬁles/57083_gemrpsmethodologypublished.pdf
Guterres, Antonio (2020). A Time to Save the Sick and Rescue coronavirus-climate-antonio-guterres.html 
Human Rights and Democracy Network (2017). A Rights-based 
Approach to Resilience: HRDN’s Input to the EEAS and Commission Joint Communication on Resilience. http://hrdn.eu/2017/ wp-content/uploads/2017/04/a-rights-based-approach-to-resilience.pdf
IASC and UNDG (2015). Joint Letter from UNDG and IASC Chairs on Guiding Principles on Resilience.
IASC, UNDG and UNDP (2013). Common Framework for Preparedness. https://interagencystandingcommittee.org/system/ ﬁles/ﬁnal_common_framework_for_preparedness.pdf
IASC (2020). Light Guidance on Collective Outcomes. https://interagencystandingcommittee.org/system/ﬁles/202006/UN-IASC%20Collective%20Outcomes%20Light%20Guidance%20-%20FINAL.pdf 
IFRC (2011). Characteristics of a Safe and Resilient Community – ifrc.org/PageFiles/96986/Final_Characteristics_Report.pdf
IGAD (2013). IGAD Drought Disaster Resilience and docs/2013_09_24_07_50_06_IDDRSI%20Strategy%20
Revised%20January%202013.pdf
IMF (2017). Global Financial Stability Report. Is Growth at Risk? global-ﬁnancial-stability-report-october-2017
Bibliography

[Page 77]
Bibliography
IPCC (2012). Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasch/report/managing-the-risks-of-extreme-events-and-disasters-to-advance-climate-change-adaptation/ 
Nelson, Donald R., W. Neil Adger and Katrina Brown (2007). “Adaptation to Environmental Change: Contributions of a 
Resilience Framework”. In Annual Review of Environment and 
Resources. 32:395–419. http://eprints.icrisat.ac.in/4245/1/
AnnualReviewofEnvResources_32_395-419_2007.pdf
Nicholls, R.J. et al. (2008). Ranking port cities with high exposure and vulnerability to climate extremes: exposure estimates. 
OECD Environment Working Papers, No. 1. ies-with-high-exposure-and-vulnerability-to-climate-extremes_011766488208 
ODI (2013). When Disasters and Conﬂicts Collide. Improving Links between Disaster Resilience and Conﬂict Prevention. tions-opinion-ﬁles/8228.pdf odi.org/publications/9599-triple-dividend-resilience-development-goals-multiple-beneﬁts-disaster-risk-management odi.org.uk/ﬁles/odi-assets/publications-opinion-ﬁles/9890.pdf
ODI (2015c). A Comparative Overview of Resilience-Buildﬁles/odi-assets/publications-opinion-ﬁles/9754.pdf
ODI (2016a). “Resilience” Across the Post-2015 Frameworks: ﬁles/resource-documents/11085.pdf
ODI (2016b). Analysis of Resilience Measurement Frameworks ﬁles/analysis_of_resilience_measurement_frameworks_and_ approaches.pdf
ODI (2017). Resilience Scan. July – September 2017. A review of literature, debates and social media on resilience. ments/11966.pdf 
ODI and Braced (2016). Climate Resilient Planning Kit: A Toolkit to Improve Resilience of Basic Service Delivery Systems. http://
OECD (2010). How should donors communicate about risk and working%20paper%20-%20Communication.pdf 
OECD (2013). Risk and Resilience - From Good Idea to Good penpdf?expires=1523188952&id=id&accname=guest&checksu m=DDAA57DFD241BD4AD4BA13FE96F874A6
OECD (2014). Guidelines for Resilience Systems Analysis – How to analyze risk and build a roadmap to resilience. sis%20FINAL.pdf
OECD (2017). Multi-year Humanitarian Funding. World Humanitarian Summit – Putting Policy into Practice. The Commitments tarian-donors/docs/multiyearfunding.pdf 
OECD and United Nations (2017). Resilience Common Diagnosis and Prioritization. Draft Version 3.
OXFAM (2017). The Future is a Choice: OXFAM Framework and 
Guidance for Resilient Development. https://policy-practice.
oxfam.org.uk/publications/the-future-is-a-choice-the-oxfamframework-and-guidance-for-resilient-developme-604990
Peters, Katie and Florence Pichon (2017). Crisis Modiﬁers – A 
Solution for a More Flexible Development–Humanitarian Syspdf
Rockefeller Foundation and Arup International Development (2015). City Resilience Framework. https://assets.rockefellerfoundation.org/app/uploads/20140410162455/City-Resilience-Framework-2015.pdf
SPC (2016). Framework for Resilient Development in the Paciﬁc – An Integrated Approach to Address Climate and Disaster Risk sional/policies/v.php?id=50272
Start Network (2017). Integrated Conﬂict Prevention and Resilﬁles/2017-03/Conﬂict%20Prevention%20Report%20.pdf
Sturgess, P.; DFID (2016). Measuring Resilience. Evidence on Demand. https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/ media/57a08956e5274a27b200002f/EoD_Topic_Guide_Measuring_Resilience_May_2016.pdf 
Twigg, John (2009). Characteristics of a Disaster-Resilient Community – A Guidance Note. Version 2. http://discovery.ucl.
ac.uk/1346086/1/1346086.pdf
United Nations (2007). Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous peoples/wpcontent/uploads/sites/19/2018/11/UNDRIP_E_web.
pdf 
United Nations (2013). The Integrated Assessment and Planning Handbook. http://repository.un.org/bitstream/handle/11176/387407/2014%20IAP%20HandBook%20LOW%20
RES%20spreads.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y 
United Nations (2015a). The Paris Agreement on Climate 
Change. https://unfccc.int/resource/docs/2015/cop21/eng/ l09r01.pdf

[Page 78]
Bibliography
United Nations (2015b). Strengthening Resilience for 
Food Security and Nutrition – A Conceptual Framework for Collaboration and Partnership among Romebased Agencies. http://documents.wfp.org/stellent/groups/public/documents/manual_guide_proced/ wfp276477.pdf?_ga=2.65302574.1812415107.15230492232133125182.1517306176
United Nations (2015c). Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk ﬁles/43291_sendaiframeworkfordrren.pdf
United Nations (2015d). Transforming our World: The 2030 
Agenda for Sustainable Development. https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/21252030%20Agenda%20 for%20Sustainable%20Development%20web.pdf
United Nations (2016a). Preventing El Niño Southern Oscillation Episodes from Becoming Disasters: A ‘Blueprint for Action’. https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/ﬁles/ resources/301215-Blueprint_Final.pdf
United Nations (2016b). World Humanitarian Summit – Comsites/default/ﬁles/resources/2017/Jul/WHS_Commitment_to_
Action_8September2016.pdf
United Nations (2016c). World Humanitarian Summit. 
Chair’s Summary – Standing up for Humanity: Committing sions/Chair%27s%20Summary%20Standing%20up%20 for%20Humanity%20Committing%20to%20Action%20-%20
Advance%2C%20unedited%20version_0.pdf 
United Nations (2016d). Report of the Open-Ended Intergovernmental Expert Working Group (OIEWG) on Indicators and Termiorg/we/inform/publications/51748 
United Nations (2016e). New York Declaration for Refugees and bol=A/RES/71/1 
United Nations (2017a). Conﬂict Analysis Practice Note. 
Version: 13 May 2016. https://undg.org/wp-content/ uploads/2016/10/Conﬂict-Analysis-Practice-Note-13-May-2016Version.pdf 
United Nations (2017b). Adopting and Analytical Framework on 
Risk and Resilience: A Proposal for More Proactive, Coordinated org/CEBPublicFiles/CEB_2017_6%20%28HLCP%2034%29.pdf
United Nations (2017c). Anticipate, Absorb, Reshape: Current Progress on the Three Key Capacities for Climate Resilience. https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5651e0a2e4b0d031533efa3b/t/5911b65e725e256f43f30e18/1494333030141/
A2R_infobrief_web_singlepages.pdf
United Nations (2017d). United Nations Plan of Action on Disaster Risk Reduction for Resilience – Towards a Risk-Informed and preventionweb.net/ﬁles/49076_unplanofaction.pdf
United Nations (2018a). Peacebuilding and Sustaining Peace – Report of the Secretary-General. https://reliefweb.int/sites/ reliefweb.int/ﬁles/resources/SG%20report%20on%20peacebuilding%20and%20sustaining%20peace.As%20issued.A-72707-S-2018-43.E.pdf
United Nations (2018b). Global Compact on Refugees. Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees Part II. 
United Nations (2018c). UN Resilience Framework – Concept 
Note.
United Nations (2019). Report of the Secretary-General on the 
2019 Climate Action Summit: The Way Forward in 2020. https:// pdf 
United Nations (2020a). A UN framework for the immediate socio-economic response to COVID-19. http://mptf.undp.org/ document/download/23903
United Nations (2020b). Climate Security Mechanism Toolbox – 
Conceptual Approach.
United Nations CEB (2017a). Report of the High-level Committee on Programmes – United Nations System Strategic 
CEBPublicFiles/CEB_2017_4_Add1.pdf
United Nations CEB (2017b). Summary of Deliberations. Second 
Files/CEB-2017-2-English.pdf
United Nations CEB (2017c). Risk and Resilience: A Proposed unsceb.org/CEBPublicFiles/RnR.pdf
United Nations CEB (2017d). Leaving No One Behind: Equality and Non-Discrimination at the Heart of Sustainable Developity%20framework-A4-web-rev3.pdf 
United Nations Climate Resilience Initiative (2017). Anticipate, Absorb, Reshape: Current Progress on Three Key Capacities for Climate Resilience. https://static1.squarespace.com/ static/5651e0a2e4b0d031533efa3b/t/5911b65e725e256f43f
30e18/1494333030141/A2R_infobrief_web_singlepages.pdf 
United Nations GA (2020). State of global peace and security in line with the central mandates contained in the Charter of the 
United Nations. Report of the Secretary-General (A/74/786). https://undocs.org/en/A/74/786 
United Nations and World Bank (2018). Pathways for Peace: 
Inclusive Approaches to Preventing Violent Conﬂict. https:// openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/28337 
UNDG Eastern and Southern Africa (2018). Strategic Framework to Support Resilient Development in Africa. forresilientdevelopmen.pdf

[Page 79]
Bibliography
UNDG Latin America and the Caribbean (2016). UN Vision 2030 
Paper. https://undg.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/15.-
2016-11-10-UN-VISION-2030.pdf 
UNDP (2014). A Resilience-Based Development Response to en/home/library/crisis-response0/a-resilience-based-development-response-to-the-syria-crisis/
UNDP (2014). Community-Based Resilience Analysis (CoBRA) org/content/undp/en/home/librarypage/environment-energy/sustainable_land_management/CoBRA/cobra-conceptual-framework.html 
UNDP (2016). Building a Resilient Foundation for Peace and 
Development. http://localizingthesdgs.org/library/73/Building-a-Resilient-Foundation-for-Peace-and-Development-Local-Governance-in-Fragile-and-Conﬂict-Affected-Settings.pdf
UNDP (2017). Community-Based Resilience Analysis (CoBRA) content/undp/en/home/librarypage/environment-energy/sustainable_land_management/CoBRA/cobra_guide.html 
UNDP (2017). 3RP Regional Refugee & Resilience Plan 20172018 in Response to the Syria Crisis – 2017 Progress Report. https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/ﬁles/resources/3RPProgress-Report-17102017-ﬁnal.pdf
UNDP (2017). ZRBF Crisis Modiﬁer Standard Operating Procedures. Functions, Processes and Communications. 
UNDP (2018). Resilience Signature Solution x 17 SDGs. Annex.
UNDP (2019). Development Finance Assessment and Integrated 
Financing Solutions. https://rb.gy/idfwdc 
UNDRR (2015). Making Development Sustainable: The Future of 
Disaster Risk Management. Global Assessment Report on Disashyogo/gar/2015/en/gar-pdf/GAR2015_EN.pdf 
UNDRR (2015). HFA Decade - The Economic and Human Impact ﬁles/42862_economichumanimpact20052014unisdr.pdf 
UNDRR (2017). Terminology on Disaster Risk Reduction. 
UNDRR (2017). How to Make Cities More Resilient – A Handorg/campaign/resilientcities/assets/documents/guidelines/
Handbook%20for%20local%20government%20leaders%20 %5B2017%20Edition%5D.pdf
UNDRR (2017). National Disaster Risk Assessment. Governance org/ﬁles/52828_nationaldisasterriskassessmentwiagu.pdf
UNDRR (2019). Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk 
Reduction. https://gar.undrr.org/
UNDRR (2020). Guidance Note on Integrating Disaster Risk 
Reduction and Climate Change Adaptation into the Common 
Country Analysis and the UN Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework.
UNDRR (2020). Scaling up Disaster Risk Reduction in Humanitarian Contexts.
UN Executive Ofﬁce of the Secretary-General (2020). Climate 
Action: Strategies and Priorities 2020-2021.
UNHABITAT (2018). City Resilience Prooﬁng Tool – Guide. http://urbanresiliencehub.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/
CRPT-Guide.pdf 
UNHCR (2016). Global Trends in Forced Displacement. global-trends-2015.html
UNHCR (2017). Climate Change, Disasters and Displacement. https://disasterdisplacement.org/wp-content/ uploads/2018/04/unhcr_climate_change_disasters_and_displacement.pdf
UNHCR (2019). Global Compact for Refugees: An Indicator 
UNOCHA (2014). Saving Lives Today and Tomorrow: Managing unocha/ﬁles/OCHA%20SLTT%20Web%20Final%20Single.PDF
UNOCHA (2018). Collective Outcomes - Operationalizing the sites/default/ﬁles/resources/2018/Apr/OCHA%20Collective%20Outcomes%20April%202018.pdf 
UNOCHA (2020). Global Humanitarian Response Plan Covid19. United Nations Coordinated Appeal. April – December 2020. ian-Response-Plan-COVID-19.pdf 
UNOCHA. Strategic response planning: Overview. space/page/strategic-response-planning 
UNOCHA and UNDP (2017). New Way of Working. let%20low%20res.002_0.pdf 
UN Sustainable Development Group (2019). United Nations 
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework – Internal 
Guidance. https://unsdg.un.org/resources/united-nations-sustainable-development-cooperation-framework-guidance 
UN Sustainable Development Group (2020). Cooperation 
Framework Companion Package.
UN Sustainable Development Group (2020). Guidance Note on 
Conﬂict Sensitivity, Peacebuilding and Sustaining Peace. (Under

[Page 80]
Bibliography
UNWOMEN (2017). Action Not Words: Confronting Gender 
Inequality through Climate Change Action and Disaster Risk 
Reduction in Asia – An overview of progress in Asia with Evidence from Bangladesh, Cambodia and Viet Nam. http://asiapaciﬁc.unwomen.org/en/digital-library/publications/2017/04/ action-not-words
USAID (2012). Building Resilience to Recurrent Crisis – USAID default/ﬁles/documents/1870/USAIDResiliencePolicyGuidanceDocument.pdf
USAID (2016). The Horn of Africa Resilience Network (HoRN) sites/default/ﬁles/documents/1866/Regional_Resilience_
Framework_2.0.pdf
Weisbord, Marvin and Sandra Janoff (1995): Future Search: An 
Action Guide to Finding Common Ground in Organizations and html 
WHO (2012). Rapid risk assessment of acute public health 
GAR_ARO_2012_1/en/ 
WHO (2015). Operational framework for building climate resilient health systems. https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/189951
WHO (2016). International Health Regulations 2005, third ediWHO (2018). International Health Regulations (2005) Monitoring and Evaluation Framework. https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/276651/WHO-WHE-CPI-2018.51-eng.pdf 
WHO (2019). Health emergency and disaster risk management framework. https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/
326106/9789241516181-eng.pdf
WHO, FAO & OIE (2019). Taking a Multisectoral, One Health 
Approach: A Tripartite Guide to Addressing Zoonotic Diseases in 
Countries. https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/325620
World Bank (2013). World Development Report 2014: Risk and Opportunity. https://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTNWDR2013/Resources/8258024-1352909193861 /8936935-1356011448215/8986901-1380046989056/WDR2014_Complete_Report.pdf 
World Bank (2014). Financing resilience and climate adaptent/dam/Worldbank/document/Climate/climate2014-resilience-brief-091214.pdf 
World Bank (2015a). Co-Beneﬁts of Disaster Risk Management. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/ en/746741467986362487/pdf/WPS7633.pdf 
World Bank (2015b). Key Lessons from the Pilot Program for 
Climate Resilience – Shaping Climate Resilience for Transforknowledge-documents/key-lessons-pilot-program-climate-resilience-full-report 
World Bank (2015c). Guide to Develop Disaster Recovery Frameworks. Sendai Conference Version. ter-recovery-frameworks 
World Bank (2017). Evaluation of Resilience-Building Operations. Operational Guidance Paper for Project Task Teams. http://documents.worldbank.org/ curated/en/669941506093754016/pdf/119937-WP-PUBLIC-P155632-68P-ReMEEvaluationGuidanceFinal.pdf 
ZRBF (2015). Building Resilience in Zimbabwe: Towards a data/media/00001050/Building-Resilience-in-Zimbabwe-Towards-a-Reseilience-Strategic-Framework.pdf
Zseleczky, Laura and Sivan Yosef (2014). Are Shocks Really 
Increasing? A Selective Review of The Global Frequency, Severity, Scope, and Impact of Five Types of Shocks. resources/2020resilienceconfpaper05.pdf 
3RP (2018): 2019-2020 Planning Guidance Note 2. Resilience 
Programming in the 3RP.

[Page 81]
Annex 1 
Glossary of terms
Events
Manifestations of threats, or a combination thereof, in a particular place during a particular period of time. (United 
Nations, 2016d: OIEWG)
Exposure
The situation of people, infrastructure, housing, production capacities and other tangible human assets located in hazard-prone areas. (United Nations, 2016d: OIEWG)
Hazard
A process, phenomenon or human activity that may cause loss of life, injury or other health impacts, property damage, social and economic disruption or environmental degradation. (United Nations, 2016d: OIEWG)
Hazardous event
The manifestation of a hazard in a particular place during a particular period of time. (United Nations, 2016d: OIEWG)
Prevention
Activities and measures to avoid existing and new disaster risks. (United Nations, 2016d: OIEWG)
Recovery
The restoring or improving of livelihoods and health, as well as economic, physical, social, cultural and environmental assets, systems and activities, of a disaster-affected community or society, aligning with the principles of sustainable development and ‘build back better’, to avoid or reduce future disaster risk. (United Nations, 
2016d: OIEWG)
Resilience
The ability of individuals, households, communities, cities, institutions, systems and societies to prevent, resist, absorb, adapt, respond and recover positively, efﬁciently and effectively when faced with a wide range of risks, while maintaining an acceptable level of functioning and without compromising long-term prospects for sustainable development, peace and security, human rights and well-being for all. (United Nations, 2017b.)
Risk 
The consequence of the interaction between a threat and the characteristics that make people and places vulnerable and exposed to that threat. (UNDRR, 2015: GAR)
Risk drivers
Processes or conditions, often related to development and inequality, that inﬂuence the level of risk by contributing to exposure and vulnerability or reducing capacity. (United Nations, 2016d: OIEWG)
Risk landscape
The array of risks that people are exposed to in a given context. (FSIN, 2015)
Shocks
External short-term deviations from long-term trends that have substantial negative effects on people’s current state of well-being, level of assets, livelihoods, or safety, or their ability to withstand future shocks. (Zseleczky and 
Yosef, 2014)
Stressors
Long-term trends or pressures that undermine the stability of a system and increase vulnerability within it. (Zseleczky and Yosef, 2014)
Theory of change
A method that explains how a given intervention or set of interventions is expected to lead to speciﬁc development change, drawing on a causal analysis based on available evidence. (UNDAF, 2017) 
Vulnerability
The conditions determined by physical, social, economic and environmental factors or processes that increase the susceptibility of an individual, a community, assets or systems to the impacts of hazards. (United Nations, 2016d:

[Page 82]
The Secretary-General of the United Nations is proposing six climate-positive actions for governments to consider in building back their economies, societies and communities:114
First
As trillions are spent to recover from COVID-19, new jobs and businesses must be delivered through a clean, green transition. Investments must accelerate the decarbonization of all aspects of our economy.
Second
Where taxpayers’ money rescues businesses, it must be creating green jobs and sustainable and inclusive growth. 
It must not be bailing out outdated polluting, carbon-intensive industries.
Third
Fiscal ﬁrepower must shift economies from grey to green, making societies and people more resilient through a transition that is fair to all and leaves no one behind.
Fourth
Looking forward, public funds should invest in the future, by ﬂowing to sustainable sectors and projects that help the environment and climate. Fossil fuel subsidies must end and polluters must pay for their pollution.
Fifth
The global ﬁnancial system, when it shapes policy and infrastructure, must take risks and opportunities related to climate into account. Investors cannot continue to ignore the price our planet pays for unsustainable growth.
Sixth
To resolve both emergencies, we must work together as an international community. Like the coronavirus, greenhouse gases respect no boundaries. Isolation is a trap. No country can succeed alone.
Annex 2 
The UN Secretary-General’s Climate 
Positive Action to Recover Better from the COVID-19 Pandemic

[Page 83]
Annex 3 
Sample of available tools for risk and resilience assessment
Resilient Systems Analysis (RSA): This OECD framework takes a systems approach with a focus on supporting multi-hazard, multi-stakeholder programming to strengthen resilience that is vertically integrated at national, subnational, community and household layers and promotes cross-sectoral approaches.
INFORM: A global risk index integrated global opensource database on natural and man-made risks, vulnerabilities and capacities.
Guidance for Risk-Informed Planning (GRIP): Developed by UNICEF. Like the RSA, this methodology fosters shared analysis of existing data and joint planning. 
CADRE Harmonisé Analysis: A harmonized nutrition/ food security framework across seven countries that are members of CILSS.
Recovery and Peacebuilding Assessments (RPBA): Processes to support more effective and coordinated reengagement in countries emerging from conﬂict or political crisis. RPBAs offer countries a standardized and internationally sanctioned approach to identify the underlying causes and impacts of conﬂict and crisis and to help governments develop a strategy for how to prioritize recovery and peacebuilding activities over time. The RPBA includes the assessment of needs and the national prioritization and costing of these needs in an accompanying transitional results matrix.
Conﬂict and Development Analysis (CDA): This tool provides guidance on conducting conﬂict analysis and applying the ﬁndings of analysis for a range of purposes. 
The CDA presents an agency-neutral approach to conﬂict analysis that assists in the gathering of information, brings structure to the analysis and leads to a strong and methodically substantive understanding of a context in support of evidence-based decision-making for UN engagement.
Words into Action Guide on National Disaster Risk 
Assessment: Developed by UNDRR and partners to encourage disaster risk assessment leaders and implementing entities to aim for holistic risk assessments that would provide an understanding of the many different dimensions of disaster risk in support of Sendai Framework implementation. 
Integrated Context Analysis (ICA): A risk and vulnerability analysis tool, produced by the WFP, combining historical trends of food security, nutrition and exposure and risks to events with other information.
Resilience Index Measurement and Analysis (RIMA): A model developed by FAO to identify and weigh factors that make a household resilient to events affecting food security.
Community-Based Resilience Analysis (COBRA): A tool developed by UNDP to measure and identify the key building blocks of community resilience.
Post-Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA): Developed by the UN Development Group, the World Bank and the 
European Union to assess the full extent of a disaster’s impact, deﬁne the needs for recovery and, in so doing, serve as the basis for designing a recovery strategy and guide donor funding. A PDNA looks ahead to restoring damaged infrastructure, houses, livelihoods, services, governance and social systems and emphasizes a reduction in future disaster risks and building resilience.
Capacity for Disaster Reduction Initiative (CADRI): Provides sectoral expertise in risk reduction and emergency preparedness in social, economic and environmental sectors and incentivizes intersectoral risk reduction approaches across the SDGs. The partnership has developed an advanced multisectoral capacity assessment methodology for disaster risk reduction that is currently being expanded to include climate change and fragility.

[Page 84]
City Resilience Proﬁling Tool (CRPT): Developed by 
UN-Habitat. This methodology provides a cross-cutting diagnostic for resilience-based urban development. By outlining the general context and performance of the city, including all relevant stakeholders and plausible shocks and stresses, and providing a framework for data collection, the CRPT allows a preliminary identiﬁcation of gaps and opportunities over a series of different aspects regarding the urban system’s structure and functionality, thereby providing a baseline to develop future actions for resilience. CRPT is aligned with SDGs, the Sendai Framework, the Paris Agreement and the New Urban Agenda.
Integrated Assessment and Planning (IAP): The IAP 
Handbook provides guidance on methodologies, tools and approaches that may be used to meet the IAP Policy’s mandatory requirements and minimum standards around the design and implementation of ‘integrated’ peace operations. In the types of complex conﬂict or fragile environments into which integrated missions are deployed, it is crucial that, at a minimum, the political, peacekeeping, humanitarian, human rights and development entities of the UN share an analysis and agree on strategic objectives for peace consolidation. 
Multi-Sector Initial Rapid Assessment (MIRA): An interagency process enabling actors to reach, from the outset, a common understanding of the situation and its likely evolution. Based on its ﬁndings, humanitarian actors can develop a joint plan, mobilize resources and monitor the situation. The MIRA is underpinned by an analytical framework that guides the collection, organization and analysis of secondary and primary data. It informs and supports the design of subsequent needs assessments and analysis that are often more detailed and operational.
Common Country Analysis (CCA):115 Provides an opportunity for UN agencies to come together with key national and international stakeholders to discuss national development challenges and common approaches in the beginning of the UNSDCF cycle. It thus can ensure that support from UN agencies in a country is coherent and complementary, drawing from each agency’s expertise, resources and mandate.
Disaster Resilience Scorecard for Cities: A tool for disaster resilience planning by cities and local governments, developed by UNDRR with the support of EC, IBM, AECOM and other partners of the global Making Cities Resilient 
Campaign. The current version, launched in 2017, is used by over 200 cities and local governments. The Scorecard provides a set of assessments that allow local governments to assess their disaster resilience, identify gaps and areas of action and update existing plans and strategies to achieve higher levels of disaster resilience. The tool helps to monitor and review progress and challenges in the implementation of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction: 2015-2030.
Climate Security Toolbox:116 Developed by the joint DPPAUNDP-UNEP Climate Security Mechanism in collaboration with other partners, the Toolbox provides a broad framing of the linkages between climate change, peace and security and seeks to establish a common understanding of this challenge across the UN System. The Toolbox contains a brieﬁng note, a conceptual approach to the integrated assessment of climate-related security risks, data sources and a checklist to help climate-proof political analysis.
COVID-19 Recovery and Needs Assessment Guidance:117 
This note sets out a methodology to assist governments to: (i) assess the overall socio-economic impact of the pandemic on people, services and production of goods and governance; (ii) identify priority needs for affected households and critical sectors of the economy; and (iii) recommend institutional mechanisms and policy measures to be undertaken in support of the recovery, including measures in place to prevent and mitigate a crisis of similar nature in future. 
Resilience 
Common 
Diagnosis and 
Prioritization (R-CAP):118 
This 
UN/OECD-developed guidance is intended to foster a common risk and vulnerability diagnosis across humanitarian-development challenges and to better understand people’s and systems’ resilience to a broad range of risks and risk determinants. It informs the UNCDF and the Country Common Analysis and is currently under development and testing in the Sahel.

[Page 85]
General ! Ensured that the principles for resilience-building have been adhered to in all stages of programming ! Ensured that resilience-building support does not generate new risks or impact negatively on systems and stakeholders
Understanding multidimensional risks and context ! Jointly identiﬁed, analysed and prioritized from a comprehensive range of risks, vulnerabilities and capacities for a given system in target location(s) ! Jointly analysed overall trends in development or humanitarian situation, and enabling environment ! Jointly analysed, in an inclusive manner, the power and inequality dimensions that are driving risks, and the differentiated vulnerabilities and capacities of different groups (women, men, youth, elderly, people with disabilities, minority groups, etc.) as part of a given system at risk
Supporting resilient systems ! Ensured that support establishes linkages across and within sectors and related systems (e.g., natural resource management, disaster risk reduction, climate change adaptation, governance of land, women’s rights and leadership) ! Engaged people, groups and stakeholders at different levels (individual, household, local, district, city, regional, national, international) that are part of a given system (e.g., livelihoods system)
Strengthening resilience capacities ! Ensured that the approach provides a good mix of interventions that build absorptive, adaptive, anticipative, preventive and transformative capacities across and within sectors, as well as managerial/leadership skills ! Ensured actions to raise risk awareness and knowledge among different groups ! Considered different timescales of interventions that address the most urgent humanitarian needs, drivers of risk, and root causes of vulnerabilities with medium- to long-term development and investment interventions
Involving multiple stakeholders, coordination and partnerships ! Considered human rights, access to basic services, and livelihood options for different groups through people-centred approaches that enhance diversity and ﬂexibility ! Ensured inclusive and collective processes, coordinated action and partnerships among multiple stakeholders and different groups to agree on joined-up actions and build partnerships ! Included action to support different groups of people and their organizations to take the lead in resilience-building activities, and hold government and/ or private sector actors to account for their actions or lack of actions in resilience-building
Learning and adapting ! Catered for spaces for learning and adjusting resilience-building activities and strategy with partners and with other stakeholders ! Fostered new visions, relationships, networks, ideas and understandings of resilience-building
Annex 4: 
Quality assurance checklist for joined-up programming to build resilience

[Page 86]
While resilience-building interventions face many of the same monitoring challenges as any other type of project or programme, there are some speciﬁc elements to consider when UN Teams measure their joined-up resilience-building efforts. These are:
Long timeframes: Building climate and disaster resilience is a long-term process that stretches far beyond the span of project/programme management cycles. The real impact of these interventions may not be apparent for decades.
Context-speciﬁcity and cross-scale interactions: The causal linkages between a particular resilience-building intervention and change, both intended and unintended, are unlikely to be clear and linear; results could be linked to multiple interactions. This makes it difﬁcult to clearly differentiate between contribution and attribution. 
Data limitations: Relying on secondary source census data may neglect the underlying drivers of resilience. 
Also, the statistical and loss accounting systems in many countries do not yet consider data that is disaggregated by sex, age and disability.120 Identifying distinct needs and challenges of speciﬁc groups, including women, however, is vital for better-informed programming and the ability to monitor whether resilience is built equally. 
Shifting baseline data: Standard project/programme evaluations track or compare results against baseline data. However, baseline comparison may be misleading, since resilience-building interventions, by deﬁnition, take place in changing environments subject to evolving climate (and other types of) hazards and risks. 
The absence of a counterfactual: For interventions designed to address infrequent extreme events, measuring resilience-building results requires that the foreseen event occur. In the absence of such an event, the true impacts of a given intervention remain elusive. Monitoring of resilience-building must therefore capture the social and economic beneﬁts towards sustainable development, even if a disaster or crisis does not occur. 
Lack of generic indicators for resilience: Resilience is highly context-speciﬁc in terms of time, space, scale, livelihoods and shocks (resilience of whom? to what?). Thus, generic indicators cannot be established even for a speciﬁc country context, making comparisons difﬁcult.
Not directly observable: Since resilience cannot be directly observed, its monitoring must rely on speciﬁc context and proxy measures, which may relate to the achievement of broader development objectives (e.g., well-being or human development). Indicators may also vary from simple measures, such as levels of education and average income, to more complex, intangible aspects, including trust and leadership. 
Sensitive to change: The key building blocks of resilience, i.e., resilience capacities, systems and risks, are dynamic and contexts change rapidly. Hence, resilience indicators need to be sensitive to change. Measurements need to be done frequently, which is resource- and capacity-intensive. 
Annex 5 
Speciﬁc considerations for monitoring resilience-building interventions

[Page 87]
This sample of tools pursues a multisector and comprehensive approach. Thematic and risk-speciﬁc M&E frameworks that focus on disasters, climate change, food security, etc. may also be valid, depending on purpose and context of the UN Team’s resilience-building efforts, but these are not featured here. 
The Resilience Index for Households (FAO):121 This indicator includes six dimensions: income and food, services, assistance, assets, adaptive capacity and stability. This was complemented by an innovative and quantitative approach – the Resilience Index Measurement and Analysis (RIMA) - which seeks to explain why and how some households cope with shocks and stressors better than others do.
The City Resilience Proﬁling Tool – CRPT (UNHABITAT, 
2018): Identiﬁes urban resilience capacity and performance indicators, including system resilience indicators. 
An urban resilience baseline and comprehensive urban database is set up through the data collection process. 
Preliminarily identiﬁes gaps and opportunities in different aspects of the urban system’s structure and functionality, thereby providing a baseline for future action. Monitoring should be repeated every two to three years.
The DFID key Performance Indicator 4 (Brooks et al., 
2014): Measures resilience at the individual level. This methodology is based on the identiﬁcation of context-speciﬁc indicators by individual projects, informed but not prescribed by a consideration of a number of dimensions of resilience where this is appropriate and helpful. These dimensions, based on those identiﬁed in the review of existing methodologies described above, are (i) assets, (ii) access to services, (iii) adaptive capacity, (iv) income and food access, (v) safety nets, (vi) livelihood viability, (vii) institutional and governance contexts, (viii) natural and built infrastructure, and (ix) personal attributes.
The IFAD Resilience Framework (IFAD, 2015): The household and community questionnaire evaluates: household assets, livelihood capitals, risk aversion and management strategies, etc. 
The Zimbabwe Resilience-building Fund (DFID, EU, GOZ, 
Sweden, UNDP):122 Presents a comprehensive system of monitoring the operation of the resilience fund; annual performance indicators and monitoring of any changes in resilience; a recurrent high-frequency monitoring that is triggered when selected shocks reach their threshold; and an impact evaluation of key research questions/ hypotheses formulated from the theory of change.
The Sendai Framework Monitoring (UNDRR):123 Online system for reporting progress in the implementation of the Sendai Framework and relevant DRR indicators of the 
SDGs by Member States. It includes global, national and local indicators related to disaster risk reduction.
International Health Regulations (2005) Monitoring and 
Evaluation Framework (WHO, 2018): The IHR-MEF provides guidance and tools for mandatory States Parties annual reporting, capacity assessment, simulation exercises, after-action reviews, and voluntary external evaluation. It aims to provide a comprehensive, accurate, country-level overview of the implementation of requirements under the IHR to develop and monitor capacities to detect, monitor and maintain public health capacities and functions. It is complemented by guidance for national action plans for health security, strategic health emergency risk assessments and health emergency and disaster risk management framework for actions.
The Community Based Resilience Assessment - COBRA (UNDP, 2017): Identiﬁes context-speciﬁc indicators for measuring community resilience, helps communities understand what contributes to long-terms local resilience-building and analyses changes in their resilience.
Annex 6 
Sample of resilience-building monitoring tools and frameworks

[Page 88]
This research paper provides a deﬁnition of localization speciﬁc to the regional response to the 
Syria crisis and asks the following questions:
 •
What has worked?
 •
What can be done differently to promote and support a more localized response?
 •
How can a localized approach to the Syria crisis be measured and analysed to continue learning and improving?
 •
Has localization improved the gendered nature of the response? •
What are the challenges?
 resilience-in-action--responding-to-the-regional-syria-.html
Based on interviews and discussions with female refugees in the three countries, the UN Women reports examine how war and displacement, coupled with gender dynamics, have impacted the well-being of Syrian female refugees. Despite differences in contexts, similarities emerged. 
Women’s life in displacement is characterized by economic insecurity, precarious civil status, limited employment opportunities despite a desire to work, challenges in accessing aid, acute isolation and increasing levels of gender-based violence.
https://www2.unwomen.org/-/media/ﬁeld ofﬁce arab states/attachments/publications/2018/ refugeecrisis-all-brief-ﬁnal-links.pdf?la=en&vs=2008 
The assessment investigates the status of Syrian refugees – in camps and outside of camps – to determine food-targeting criteria that would allow programme adjustments based on needs. It also was designed to address long-standing concerns expressed by refugees and local authorities regarding previous targeting. https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/ﬁles/resources/65023-2.pdf
Annex 7 
Building resilience in refugee crisis contexts: 
Lessons and tools from the 3RP & GCR

[Page 89]
The data below represents some of the key achievements of 3RP partners in 2018 by type of intervention. While not an exhaustive list, it indicates the scale and scope of how 3RP partners are assisting refugees and impacted host community members. For a full list of people reached by type of intervention, please see the 3RP end-of-year dashboards, available here:
https://data2.unhcr.org/en/documents/download/68557
The 2019 Vulnerability Assessment Framework (VAF) population study explores different types of vulnerability dimensions across multiple sectors from a representative sample of registered Syrian refugees in Jordan. This study provides information about vulnerabilities within the targeted population and contributes to reﬂection within UNHCR on how to interpret their multisectoral Home Visit assessments. By exploring relationships between vulnerability indicators and other data collected, the report outlines key trends and relationships. https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/ﬁles/resources/68856.pdf
The Syria situation remains the largest refugee crisis in the world. With the vast majority of refugees residing in urban, peri-urban and rural areas, basic public services and infrastructure in host countries quickly became overstretched and pre-existing vulnerabilities were exacerbated, particularly in affected host communities. In 2015, recognizing the unique challenges facing host countries and communities in so generously hosting Syrian refugees, the international community instituted a new comprehensive approach. Going beyond emergency assistance, the new approach combined humanitarian and development responses to the Syria crisis into a single coherent plan in line with national plans and priorities. The 3RP has been at the forefront of many policy and programmatic innovations including support to national and local systems and supporting the self- reliance of refugees and host communities. 
The Global Compact on Refugees (GCR) was afﬁrmed by the United Nations General Assembly in 
December 2018. Its objectives are to: •
Ease pressures on host countries; •
Enhance refugee self-reliance; •
Expand access to third-country solutions; and •
Support conditions in countries of origin for return in safety and dignity
These four objectives are interlinked and interdependent and can be achieved through the mobilization of political will, a broadened support base, and arrangements that facilitate more equitable, sustained and predictable contributions by states and other relevant stakeholders.

[Page 90]
Endnotes
1 United Nations CEB, 2017c.
2 The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development; the Sendai 
Framework on Disaster Risk 
Reduction; the Paris Agreement on 
Climate Change; the Outcome of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development (Addis Ababa Action Agenda); the WHS Commitment to Action; the SAMOA Pathway; the Istanbul 
Programme of Action; the Global 
Compact on Migration; the 
Global Compact on Refugees; the Sustaining Peace Twin 
Resolutions (S/RES/2282 and A/
RES/70/262); the Global Study on the Implementation of Security 
Council Resolution 1325; the 
High-Level Panel on Humanitarian 
Financing; the International Health 
Regulations, 2005; CEB, 2015 
Note on the peace-humanitariandevelopment nexus in key post-2015 reviews, processes and frameworks; The Grand 
Bargain – A Shared Commitment to Better Serve People in Need; 
UN Declaration on the Rights of 
Indigenous Populations (2007), 
UNSG Climate Action Strategy and 
Priorities 2020-21.
3 UNDRR, 2019.
4 The UN Framework for the 
Immediate Socio-Economic 
Response to COVID-19; the 
COVID-19 Global Humanitarian 
Response Plan. 
5 ‘Joined-up’ refers to UN agencies implementing their respective programmes, in a particular geographic location in a wellcoordinated, sequenced and layered manner, whilst ‘joint’ refers to joint 
UN programming. 
6 United Nations CEB, Nov 2017b.
7 United Nations, 2018c. Concept 
Note on the UN Resilience 
Framework. 
8 DPPA, FAO, OHCHR, UNEP, 
UNDESA, UNDOCO, UNDP, UNDRR, 
UNEOSG, UNFCCC, UNFPA, 
UNHABITAT, UNICEF, UNOCHA, UN 
Women, WFP, WHO and WMO.
9 DPPA, FAO, OCHA, UNEP, UNDP, 
UNDRR, UNFPA, UNHABITAT, 
UNICEF, UN Women, WFP and 
WHO conducted literature review; took stock of ongoing initiatives within and outside the UN System; and prepared an annotated outline and narrative of the framework.
10 United Nations CEB/2017/
HLCP33/CRP.1
11 UNDG Eastern and Southern 
Africa, 2018.
priorities/prevention.shtml 
13 United Nations, 2018c. Concept 
Note on the UN Resilience 
Framework.
14 In this document, “UN Teams” refers to various types of UN presences, such as UN Country 
Teams and Humanitarian Teams. 
Although the guidance may not be directly applicable to 
Special Political Missions and 
Peacekeeping Operations, they are nevertheless essential partners for resilience in mission settings, especially where a UN Security 
Council mandate frames the UN’s work, such as where UN presences are integrated under a triplehatted DSRSG/RC/HC function.
15 The country consultations featured workshops, focus group discussions and interviews with key actors including government ofﬁcials, UN presences on the ground, donor agencies, civil society organizations and the private sector.
16 UNDRR, 2019.
17 UNOCHA, 2014: Saving Lives 
Today and Tomorrow: Managing the Risks of Humanitarian 
Crises, 2014; OCHA, Leaving 
No One Behind: Humanitarian 
Effectiveness in the age of the 
SDGs.
18 UNHCR, 2016: Global Trends in 
Forced Displacement in 2015.
19 Inter-State war, the major preoccupation at the time the 
United Nations was founded, is a rare event today, even if the threat of a major global conﬂict remains real; meanwhile, intra-State armed conﬂict is resurgent. 
20 UNGA A/74/786.
21 United Nations, the World Bank, 
2017: Pathways for Peace: 
Inclusive approaches to preventing violent conﬂict.
22 UNDRR, 2015: HFA Decade - The 
Economic and Human Impact of 
Disasters in the last 10 years.
23 R. J. Nicholls et al., 2008.
24 This guidance shall be without prejudice to principled humanitarian action pursuant to General Assembly resolution 
46/182 and related resolutions. 
Although the guidance may not be directly applicable to SPMs and 
PKO, they constitute important partners in resilience-building.
25 Adapted from ODI, 2015a: The 
Triple Dividend of Resiliencebuilding.
26 UNDRR, 2015: Global Assessment 
Report on Disaster Risk Reduction.
27 Carbon Disclosure Project (CDP), 
2015; ODI, 2015a.
28 World Bank, 2015a: Co-Beneﬁts of 
Disaster Risk Management.
29 Climate impacts result from extreme events such as drought, storm and ﬂoods, but also include weather variability with temperature or rainfall pattern changes and gradual changes such as sea level rise.
30 Fostering climate resilience is a speciﬁc goal of the Paris 
Agreement on climate change and a clear objective of the UN 
Secretary-General’s Climate 
Change Strategy.
31 See International Health 
Regulations (2005) for guidance.
32 Guterres, Antonio: A Time to Save the Sick and Rescue the Planet, 
2020.
33 United Nations, Report of the 
Secretary-General on the 2019 
Climate Action Summit: The Way 
Forward in 2020, 2019.
34 Aall, Crocker: Building Resilience and Social Cohesion in Conﬂict, 
2019. 
35 This reinforces the need for countries to implement the 
International Health Regulations (2005), the legally binding international agreement to prevent, protect against, control and provide a public health response to the international spread of disease and strengthen global health security.
36 See Annex 1 for a more extended glossary of terms.
37 This deﬁnition of resilience is taken from the 2017 CEB-approved paper on Risk and Resilience (United Nations, 2017b). The deﬁnition reﬂects the evolving understanding of resilience. 
It represents a broadening of the concept from its origins in the study of ecosystems and earlier conceptions that focused solely on absorptive, adaptive and transformative capacities in response to threats, and did not place sufﬁcient emphasis on

[Page 91]
proactively preventing or resisting them. The UN Common Guidance on Resilience used the CEBapproved deﬁnition as a starting point which following further consultation with UN entities resulted in identifying the key elements of resilience (see Section 
3.2). 
38 UNDRR, 2015: Global Assessment 
Report on Disaster Risk Reduction.
39 Pathways for Peace, p. 215; Sendai 
Framework, para 6; UNDRR 
Terminology on Disaster Risk 
Reduction, 2017.
40 Threat was considered as the somewhat broader term that can span natural hazards as well as conﬂict and human rights violations; see United Nations 
CEB, 2017b.
41 Also to mention are climate slow onset events such as desertiﬁcation, glacial retreat and related impacts, land and forest degradation, loss of biodiversity, ocean acidiﬁcation, gradually increasing temperatures or sea level rise.
42 United Nations, 2016d: Report of the OIEWG.
43 OECD, 2014. 
44 Adapted from UNDG Eastern and 
Southern Africa, 2017.
45 CEB, 2017d: Leaving No One 
Behind.
46 UNDRR, 2019.
47 OECD, 2014.
48 OECD, 2013.
49 These include the ability to demonstrate classical leadership, managerial, ﬁnancial, administrative, communication, analysis, planning, implementation, monitoring and risk assessment skills, among others.
50 The characterizations of different types of capacities often overlap.
51 For the purpose of the UN 
Resilience Guidance, the most relevant principles have been selected from a rage of sources, indicated in brackets. An effort was made not to duplicate other elements of the UN Resilience 
Guidance (e.g., those related to the what and how of resilience).
52 Examples are climate change, governance and insecurity, economic marginalization and volatility, environmental degradation and demographic changes.
53 OECD, 2014.
54 OECD, 2010.
55 OECD, 2014.
56 Local and national partners have a key role to play to inform substantive decision-making and priority-setting that take into account context and location speciﬁcities. 
57 Pathways for Peace, 2018.
58 OECD, 2014.
59 Including non-resident and regional entities.
60 UN Declaration on the Rights of 
Indigenous Peoples, 2007. 
61 See Part 2.
62 OECD, 2014.
63 Stakeholder analysis. OECD, 2014.
64 OECD, 2014.
65 OECD, 2014.
66 Many UN agencies have their own thematic tools/guidance on riskinformed development planning or on mainstreaming risk/resilience, although these are usually not comprehensive and often have a speciﬁc thematic focus on disaster, climate change, conﬂict, etc.
67 United Nations, 2016b: WHS. 
68 See also UNSDCF Companion 
Piece on HDP Collaboration and the IASC Light Guidance on 
Collective Outcomes (2020).
69 United Nations, 2019: UN 
Sustainable Development 
Cooperation Framework Guidance.
70 United Nations, 2019: UN 
Sustainable Development 
Cooperation Framework Guidance. 
UNDRR, 2020: Guidance note on Integrating Disaster Risk 
Reduction and Climate Change 
Adaptation into the Common 
Country Analysis and the UN 
Sustainable Development 
Cooperation Framework.
71 UNOCHA: Strategic response planning: Overview. See also 
UNDRR, 2020: Scaling up Disaster 
Risk Reduction in Humanitarian contexts.
72 United Nations, 2013. IAP.
73 World Bank, 2015c.
74 United Nations, 2016b: WHS; 
United Nations, 2017b.
75 United Nations, 2016b: WHS.
76 UNOCHA, 2018.
77 UNOCHA, 2018.
78 UNDG Latin America and the 
Caribbean, 2016.
79 Weisbord, Marvin and Sandra 
Janoff, 1995.
80 UNSDG, 2020. UNDRR, 2020: 
Guidance note on Integrating 
Disaster Risk Reduction and 
Climate Change Adaptation into the Common Country 
Analysis and the UN Sustainable 
Development.
81 Such as: National Adaptation 
Plans, National DRR Strategies/
Plans, Nationally Determined 
Contributions, National Health/
Education Strategies, National 
Agricultural Investment Plans, etc. 
82 Adapted from Action Aid, 2016; 
Oxfam 2017.
83 FAO, IFPRI, UNDP, UNICEF, and 
WFP; Report on Resilience and 
Vulnerability in South Sudan; Juba; 
2019, p. 8.
84 UNSDG, 2020. 
85 A growing number of organizations have developed and highlighted resilience indicators as a key component of measuring programme success. See ODI, 
2016b: Resilience Measurement, p. 7. The different resilience measurement frameworks and tools vary in terms of purpose, scale, focus and method of analysis. See ODI, 2017 for overviews of various frameworks for measuring resilience.
86 ODI, 2016b: Resilience 
Measurement.
87 UNHCR, 2019.
88 World Bank, 2017.
89 World Bank, 2017, p. 27.
90 OECD, 2014, p. 32.
91 OECD, 2014, pp. 32-35; FAO, 2017.
92 Adapted from Global Resilience 
Partnership.
93 In some cases, working with the national government may not be feasible or possible and different approaches will be required. In those cases, it is recommended to place even stronger emphasis on local capacities and civil society actors as well as inter-agency collaboration.
94 United Nations, 2016c: WHS 
Chair’s Summary.
95 Oxfam, 2017.
96 Such as Peace and Development 
Advisors, Human Rights 
Advisors, HDP Advisors, Gender advisors, Strategic Planners and 
Economists.
98 The CRRF adapts the principles

[Page 92]
and objectives set out in Annex 
I of the New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants to the Ugandan context. The 
CRRF informed the preparation of a Global Compact on 
Refugees, included in the High 
Commissioner’s annual report to the General Assembly in 2018.
sustainabledevelopment/ blog/2016/10/un-private-sectorto-create-platform-for-ﬁnancingsdgs/ 
100 By seeking ways to use development funding for addressing some emergencyrelated needs and vice-versa.
101 Such as: Global Environment 
Facility (GEF), Least Developed 
Country Facility (LDCF), 
Adaptation Fund (AF), Special 
Climate Change Fund (SCCF), 
Pilot Program for Climate 
Resilience (PPCR).
102 ODI, 2015a: Triple Dividend.
103 IMF, 2017a.
ment.fund 
105 World Bank, 2014.
106 Eighty-ﬁve pre-deﬁned thresholds need to be based on national or subnational data rather than on regional aggregates if payouts are to support resilience.
107 UNDP, 2019.
108 https://jointsdgfund.org/sites/ default/ﬁles/2019-05/20181127TORs-JF-for-2030-Agenda.pdf 
109 The number of pooled funds and the amounts channeled to UN agencies through them have dramatically increased over the past 15 years, a trend that is expected to continue under 
UN reform in order to promote collaboration and to create an opportunity for the UN System to expand and diversify its donor base. In 2004, UN trust funds were capitalized by 20 different donors, with 6.7 percent coming from non-top-10 donors. Ten years later, the donor base was expanded to 53 donors, with 21.1 percent coming from non-top-10 donors. 
111 OECD, 2017.
112 The three founding pillars of the UN system are: peace and security, human rights, and development.
113 United Nations, 2018a.
114 Guterres, Antonio: A Time to 
Save the Sick and Rescue the 
Planet, 2020.
115 UNSDG, 2020.
116 United Nations, 2020b.
117 European Union, United Nations, 
World Bank (2020).
118 OECD and United Nations, 2017.
119 World Bank, 2017.
120 Global Earthquake Model, 2017.
background/tools/rima/en/ net/sendai-framework/sendaiframework-monitor/